


 
This resource is endorsed by Cambridge Assessment
International Education
Provides support for Option B for the Cambridge
IGCSE, IGCSE 9-1 and O Level syllabuses
(0470/0977/2147) for examination from 2020.
Has passed Cambridge International’s rigorous quality-
assurance process
Developed by subject experts
For Cambridge schools worldwide
The Student eTextbook  version of this book  contains interactive quizzes.
Note that these quizzes are not exam-style questions.
 
Every effort have been made to trace all copyright holders, but if any have
been inadvertently overlooked the publishers will be pleased to make the
necessary arrangements at the first oppor tunity.
 
Although every effort has been made to ensure that website addresses are
correct at time of going to press, Hodde r Education cannot be held
responsible for the content of any website mentioned in this book . It is
sometimes possible to find a relocated web page by typing in the address of
the home page for a website in the URL window of your browser.
All exam-style questions and sample answers in this title were written by the
author. In examinations, the way marks are awarded may be different.
Hachette UK’s policy is to use papers that are natural, renewable and
recyclable products and made from wood g rown in sustainable forests. The
logging and manufacturing processes are expected to conform to the
environmental regulations of the country of origin.
Orders: please contact Bookpoint Ltd, 130 M ilton Park, Abingdon, Oxon
OX14 4S E. Telephone: +44 (0)1235 827720. Fax: +44 (0)1235 400401.
Lines are open 9.00–5.00, M onday to Saturday, with a 24-hour message
answering service. Visit our website at www.hodde reducation.com
® IGCSE is a registered trademark
© Ben Walsh 2018
First published in 2013
This second edition published in 2018 by
Hodde r Education
An Hachette UK Company
Carmelite House, 50 V ictoria Embankment
London EC4Y 0DZ
Impression number  5 4 3 2 1
Year 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018
All rights reserved. Apart from any use permitted under UK copyright law,
no part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying and
recording, or held within any information storage and retrieval system,
without permission in writing from the publisher or under licence from the
Copyright Licensing Agency Limited. Further details of such licences (for
reprographic reproduction) may be obtained from the Copyright Licensing
Agency Limited, www.cla.co.uk
Cover photo © toa555-Fotolia
Illustrations by Barking Dog Art
Second edition typeset by Aptara
Printed and bou nd in Italy
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library
ISBN 978 1 5104 21 18 9
eISBN 978 1 5104 1997 1

Contents
How this book will help you to achieve your best in
Cambridge IGCSE®/O-Level History
Photo acknowledgements
SECTION 1 Core Content Option B
The 20th century: International Relations since 1919
Part 1 The Inter-War Years, 1919–39
1 Were the peace treaties of 1919–23 fair?
2 To what extent was the League of Nations a success?
3 Why had international peace collapsed by 1939?
Part 2 The Cold War and the Gulf, 1945–2000
4 Who was to blame for the Cold War?
5 How effectively did the USA contain the spread of communism?
6 How secure was the USSR’s control over eastern Europe,
1948–c.1989?
7 Why did events in the Gulf matter, c.1970–2000?
Exam Focus: Core Content questions
SECTION 2 Depth Studies
8 Russia, 1905–41
9 Germany, 1918–45
10 The USA, 1919–41
Exam Focus: Paper 1 Depth Study questions
Exam Focus: Paper 4 Depth Study: Writing extended
answers
Glossary
How this book will help you to
achieve your best in Cambridge
IGCSE®/O-Level History
It explores the Key Questions
The syllabus is issues based. The aim is for you to develop and support
informed views about the past. This book  reflects that structure and that aim.
•  Each chapter is organised around a Key Question from the syllabus.
•  Each Key Question is broken dow n into Focus Points which tackle the
main issues within each Key Question.
•  Each Focus Point is tackled through a Focus Task. If you tackle all the
Focus Points, you will be in a strong position to form your own arguments
and views in relation to the Key Question.
It will help you to learn the content
This book  covers the Option B 20th century route through the Core Content
plus three Depth Studies. You will need good k nowledge of the main events
and the detail. This book  will help you acquire both.
The author text explains all the key content clearly. But it does not just drone
on about one thing after another. It helps you understand and investigate
issues and establish links and relationships between topics.
SOURCE 1
An American cartoon commenting on Stalin’s
take-over of eastern Europe. The bear
represents the USSR.
It’s full of brilliant sources. History is at its best when you can see
what real people said, did, wrote, sang, watched on film, laughed
about, cried over and got upset about. Sources can really help you
to understand the story better and remember it because they help
you to see the big concepts and ideas in terms of what they meant
to individuals at the time.
Factfile
The League of Nations
•  The League’s home was in Geneva in Switzerland.
The Factfiles (key events) and Profiles (key people) are packed
with hard facts and examples to use in your own work to support
your arguments.
Think!
Think of a suitable headline for each of the six ‘episodes’ in the
collapse of the USSR.
Many of the Focus Tasks deal with quite big issues that you will
find easier if you have thought things through beforehand. So the
Think! feature is designed to prepare you for the Focus Tasks.
Sometimes they are literally steps en route to a Focus Task, as in
Chapter 4; at other times they simply ask you to think about an
issue that is particularly important for understanding the period
better. Activities serve a similar purpose – get you thinking about
what you are reading – but they usually invite a more creative
response.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember at least two examples of agreement
at Yalta and the one (main!) disagreement.
There are Revision Tips. If the content seems overwhelming to
you and you just don’t know where to start this gives you an
achievable target – just a couple of key points on each topic to
identify and remember. Think of it as a ‘first aid’ kit.
Keywords
Make sure you know what these terms mean and are able to define
them confidently.
Keywords. Every topic has its own vocabulary. If you don’t know
what these words mean you won’t be able to write about the
subject. So for each chapter we have provided a keyword list.
These are the kind of words or terms that could be used in sources
or a question without any explanation so you need to be able to
understand them and use them confidently. They are all defined in
the Glossary on page 360.
Chapter Summary
The collapse of international peace
Finally there is a content Summary at the end of every chapter or
Key Question. This condenses all the content into a few points,
which should help you to get your bearings in even the most
complicated content.
It will help you to apply what you learn
The next big aim of this book  is to help you to work with the content and
think about it so that you are ready to apply what you learn. This is not an
easy task. You will not suddenly develop this skill. You need to practise
studying an issue, deciding what you think, and then selecting from all that
you know the points that are really relevant to your argument.
FOCUS TASK 8.10
How did the Bolsheviks consolidate their rule?
1  Draw a timeline from 1917 to 1924, and mark on it the events of
that period mentioned in the text.
2  Mark on the timeline:
    a)  one moment at which you think Bolshevik rule was most
threatened
    b)  one moment at which you think it was most secure.
3  Write an explanation of how the Bolsheviks made their rule more
secure. Mention the following:
    •  the power of the Red Army
    •  treatment of opposition
    •  War Communism
    •  the New Economic Policy
    •  the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
    •  the victory in the Civil War
    •  the promise of a new society
The main way we help you with this is through the Focus Tasks.
The title is a Focus Point or Key Question from the Cambridge
IGCSE and O-Level syllabus. Every Focus Point has its own Focus
Task.
Often we ask you to create a comparative or a summary chart or
timeline, as in this example. The completed chart will also be
perfect for revision purposes.
They help you to apply your knowledge. One of the most
important skills in history is the ability to select, organise and
deploy (use) knowledge to answer a particular question.
The structure of the task helps you to focus on what is important
and ignore what is not. There are bullet points or charts to help you
to organise your thinking.
And remember, to help you further, most Focus Tasks have a linked
Revision Tip that gives you a more basic target – just a couple of
key points that you will be able to apply in your answers.
It helps you prepare for your examination
If you read all the text and tackled all the Focus Tasks in this book  we are
sure you would also find you were well prepared for the challenges of your
exam, but you will probably also want something more exam-focused – y ou
will want to see the kind of questions you will face in an exam and how you
might go about answering them. So:
Exam Focus
Exam Focus starts on page 172 (for the Core Content) and page
346 (for the Depth Studies). These pages take you step by step
through the exam requirements and show you the kinds of
questions you might be asked, although these are not past paper
questions. We also analyse and comment on some sample
answers. These are not answers by past candidates. We have
written them to help you to see what a good answer might look
like.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  What were the Five-Year Plans? (4)
Exam-Style Questions. At the end of every chapter we have
written some exam-style questions for you to practise. These are
not from past papers. And in the Exam Focus sections there are
plenty more examples of structured essays and questions on
prescribed topics with sources and information.
Source Analysis
Explain how and why Sources 11 and 12 differ in their interpretation
of the Soviet intervention.
Source Analysis. Sources are an integral part of history. Historians
use them to write history. We have used them to add colour and
human detail to the stories of Modern World History. In Cambridge
IGCSE and O-Level History you will also use sources to examine an
issue, when you will need to evaluate sources. So dotted throughout
this book are Source Analysis questions that help you to evaluate
sources – for example, thinking about their message, their purpose
or their usefulness for a particular line of enquiry.
Photo credits
p.1 © Universal Images Group / Getty Images; p.2 © Universal Images
Group / Getty Images; p.4 © Punch Limited; p.6 © Hulton Archive / Getty
Images; p.7 Image courtesy of Kent Cartoon Library © Solo Syndication; p.8
© Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.9 © Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.10
© Illustrated London News Ltd / Mary Evans; p.14 © Mary Evans Picture
Library; p.15 © TopFoto.co.uk; p.16 © ULLS004005 /  TopFoto; p.17 © akg-
images; p.18 Cartoon by Will Dyson published by Daily Herald on 13 M ay
1919, B ritish Cartoon Library; p.19 © Topfoto; p.21 l © Graphik:
Landesarchiv Berlin/N.N, r © Imagno / Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.28
© United Nations Library Geneva; p.30 © Express Newspapers, London;
p.31 l © Punch Limited; p.32 ‘Your Bridge, Jonathan. We Shan’t quarrel
about this…’, The League of Nations Bridge, American cartoon reprinted in
the British newspaper ‘The Star’, June 1919 ( newsprint), American School,
(20th century) / British Library, London, UK / © British Library Board. All
Rights Reserved / Bridgeman Images; p.33 © Punch Limited; p.34 © United
Nations Library Geneva; p.40 © Punch Limited; p.42 © Punch Limited; p.47
© Solo Syndication / Associated Newspapers Ltd.; p.49 © Solo Syndication
/ Associated Newspapers Ltd.; p.51 © Punch Limited; p.52 © Bildarchiv
Preussischer Kulturbesitz; p.53 © Punch Limited; p.56 © Solo Syndication /
Associated Newspapers Ltd. Photo: John Frost Historical Newspapers; p.61
c © Photo 12 /  Alamy Stock Photo, b Cartoon by David Low, the Evening
Standar d 18 J anuary 1935 ©  Solo Syndication / Associated Newspapers
Ltd. Photo: British Cartoon Archive; p.62 l © Bruce Alexander Russell, r ©
The Art Archive / REX / Shutterstock; p.63 © Punch Limited; p.64 ©
Topham Picturepoint / TopFoto; p.65 l © Topham Picturepoint / TopFoto;
p.67 © Solo Syndication / Associated Newspapers Ltd.; p.69 l © Poppe rfoto
/ Getty Images, r © Topham Picturepoint / TopFoto; p.70 © Punch Limited;
p.71 © 2006 A linari / TopFoto; p.72 © TopFoto; p.80 © Universal Images
Group / Getty Images; p.82 © Associated Press / TopFoto; p.84© Solo
Syndication / Associated Newspapers Ltd.; p.89 © Photo 12 /  Universal
Images Group / Getty Images; p.90 l © Solo Syndication / Associated
Newspapers Ltd.; p.94 l © Hulton Archive / Stringer / Getty Images; p.103 ©
Solo Syndication / Associated Newspapers Ltd.; p.104 © VintageCorner /
Alamy Stock Photo; p.105 © Picture Post / Stringer / Getty Images; p.112 ©
Cartoon by Victor Weisz, London E vening St andar d, 24 O ctober 1962, S olo
Syndication / Associated Newspapers Ltd / British Cartoon Archive; p.113
© Solo Syndication / Associated Newspapers Ltd.; p.116 © Associated
Press / Topham / TopFoto; p.121 © Nick Ut / AP / REX / Shutterstock; p.122
© CBS Photo Archive / Getty images; p.123 1967 H erblock Cartoon © The
Herb Block Foundation; p.124 © Topham Picturepoint; p.133 © Keystone /
Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.135 t © AP / Topfoto, c © Josef Koudelka
/ Magnum Photos; p.138 cl © Topham Picturepoint, cr © Poppe rfoto / Getty
Images, b © Rolls Press / Poppe rfoto / Getty Images; p.140 © Hulton
Archive / Getty Images; p. 141 © Paul Poppe r / Poppe rfoto / Getty; p.145 ©
Pictorial Press Ltd / Alamy Stock Photo; p.147 c © Sputnik/Topfoto, b ©
Andrews McMeel Syndication; p. 150 © Punch Limited; p.154 © Sipa Press
/ REX / Shutterstock; p.156 © 2005 R oger-Viollet / Topfoto; p.158 ©
TopFoto.co.uk; p.160 © Michel Setboun / Getty Images; p.161 © ullsteinbild
/ TopFoto; p.163 © Kaveh Kazemi / Getty Images; p.167 © Cartoon by
Nicholas Garland, Independent 10th August 1990 /  British Cartoon Archive,
University of Kent; p.168 © Cartoon by Nicholas Garland, Daily Telegraph
8th March 1991 /  British Cartoon Archive, University of Kent; p.169 ©
Punch Limited; p.182 © Topham Picturepoint / TopFoto; p.183 © News of
the World/NI Syndication; p.184 ‘Your Bridge, Jonathan. We Shan’t quarrel
about this…’, The League of Nations Bridge, American cartoon reprinted in
the British newspaper ‘The Star’, June 1919 ( newsprint), American School,
(20th century) / British Library, London, UK / © British Library Board. All
Rights Reserved / Bridgeman Images; p.185 © Punch Limited; p.186 © Nick
Ut / AP / REX / Shutterstock; p.187 1967 H erblock Cartoon © The Herb
Block Foundation; p.188 © Universal Images Group / Getty Images; p.191 ©
Poppe rfoto / Getty Images; p.192 © David King Collection; p.195 ©
Illustrated London News; p.196 © David King Collection; p.197 ©
SPUTNIK / Alamy Stock Photo; p.199 © Sovfoto / Universal Images Group /
REX / Shutterstock; p.201 © David King Collection; p. 203 © Mary Evans
Picture Library; p. 209 Science History Images / Alamy Stock Photo; p.210
© RIA Novos ti / TopFoto; p.213 l © Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, LC-DIG-ggbain-30798, r © Illustrated London News;
p.216 Poster depicting ‘The Bolshevik Rule over the Cossack Villages’,
1918–21 ( colour litho), Russian School, (20th century) / British Library,
London, UK / © British Library Board. All Rights Reserved / Bridgeman
Images; p.2 17 © Bolshevik cartoon on the intervention of the USA, Britain
and France in the Russian Civil War, 1919 ( colour litho), Russian School,
(20th century) / Private Collection / Peter Newark Military Pictures / The
Bridgeman Art Library; p.218 © Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.221 ©
David King Collection; p.223 © Illustrated London News; p.228 ©
TopFoto.co.uk; p.229 Original materials held by University of Chicago
Library Special Collections Research Center; p.232 l © RIA Novos ti /
TopFoto; p.233 bl © David King Collection; p.236 Original materials held
by University of Chicago Library Special Collections Research Center;
p.240 © war posters / Alamy; p.246 © Graphik: Landesarchiv Berlin / N.N;
p.247 l © Punch Limited, r © Ullsteinbild / Topfoto; p.248 © World History
Archive / Topfoto.co.uk; p.250 © Bettmann / Getty Images; p.252 © Hulton
Archive / Stringer/Getty Images; p.253 © Scherl / Südde utsche Zeitung
Photo; p.255 © David Crausby / Alamy; p.257 © Scherl / Südde utsche
Zeitung Photo; p.258 b © Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.261 © Punch
Limited; p.263 Photo 12 /  Universal Images Group / Getty Images; p.266 t ©
Keystone / Stringer / Hulton Archive / Getty Images, b © SZ Photo / Scherl /
Bridgeman Images; p.267 t © Ullsteinbild / Topfoto, c © Ullsteinbild /
Topfoto; p.268 cl © Keystone / Hulton Archive / Getty Images, bl © Topical
Press Agency / Stringer/Hulton Archive/Getty Images, r © Scherl /
Südde utsche Zeitung Photo; p.270 © war posters / Alamy; p.271 © Topham
Picturepoint / TopFoto; p.272 © Hulton Deutsch / Getty Images; p.274 ©
Ullstein Bild / TopFoto; p.279 © Scherl / Südde utsche Zeitung Photo; p.280
© Ben Walsh; p. 281 © Weimar Archive / Mary Evans Picture Library; p.282
© Ullstein Bild / TopFoto; p.283 © Feltz / Topham Picturepoint / TopFoto;
p.287 © Poppe rfoto / Getty Images; p.288 © Rue des Archives /
Südde utsche Zeitung Photo; p.289 © Photo 12 /  Alamy Stock Photo; p.290 t
©Sputnik / TopFoto, b © Corbis Historical via Getty Images; p.296 ©
Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division; LC-DIG-fsa-8b29516;
p.302 r © Everett Collection Historical / Alamy Stock Photo; p.304 ©
Cartoon of the 1920s  depicting the difficult times of the American Farmers
(colour litho) by Fitzpatrick, Daniel Robert (1891–1969)  Private Collection
/ Peter Newark American Pictures / The Bridgeman Art Library; p.305 ©
Bettman / Getty Images; p.307 © The Builder (colour litho) by Beneker,
Gerrit Albertus (1882–1934) , Private Collection / Peter Newark American
Pictures / The Bridgeman Art Library; p.308 Lordprice Collection / Alamy
Stock Photo; p.310 t © Bettman / Getty Images, b © Bettman / Getty Images;
p.311 © Corbis Historical / Getty Images; p.313 © San Francisco Examiner;
p.315 t © Mary Evans Picture Library, b © Bettman / Getty Images; p.316 ©
Hulton Archive / Getty Images; p.317 © Bettman / Getty Images; p.318 © US
National Archives, Rocky Mountains Division; p.320 l © ‘Wanted … a  little
boy’s plea’, c. 1915 ( engraving), American School, (20th Century), Private
Collection / Peter Newark American Pictures / The Bridgeman Art Library, r
© Culver Pictures; p.322 t © Bettman / Getty Images, c © Bettman / Getty
Images, b © Clive Weed, Judge, June 12, 1926—A merican Social History
Project; p.323 © Underwood A rchives / Getty Images; p.328 © Poppe rfoto /
Getty Images; p.329 Charles Deering McCormick Library of Special
Collections, Northwestern University Library, © John T. McCutcheon Jr.;
p.330 © Car and farm machinery buried by dust and sand, Dallas, South
Dakota, 1936 ( b/w photo) by American Photographer (20th Century), Private
Collection / Peter Newark American Pictures / The Bridgeman Art Library;
p.331 t © Topham Picturepoint / Topfoto, c © Corbis Historical / Getty
Images; p.332 © ‘Smilette’, Democrat Election Poster, 1932 ( litho) by
American School (20th Century), Private Collection / Peter Newark
American Pictures / The Bridgeman Art Library; p.335 l © The Granger
Collection, NYC / TopFoto, r © The Granger Collection, NYC / TopFoto;
p.337 t © Library of Congress Prints and Photographs Division; LC-DIG-
fsa-8b29516, b © Photographs in the Carol M. Highsmith Archive, Library
of Congress, Prints and Photographs Division; p.338 © The Granger
Collection, NYC / TopFoto; p.339 tl © Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division; br © ‘Boo-hoo the New Deal is ruining the Country’,
cartoon of the effects of Franklin Roosevelt’s (1882–1945)  economic
policies, 1936 ( litho), American School, (20th century) / Private Collection /
Peter Newark American Pictures / Bridgeman Images; p.340 tl © Punch
Limited, bl Courtesy Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New York;
p.341 Courtesy Franklin D. Roosevelt Library, Hyde Park, New York; p.343
© ‘World’s Highest Standard of Living…’, 1937, 1937 ( litho), American
School, (20th Century) / Private Collection / Peter Newark American
Pictures / The Bridgeman Art Library p. 53 Source 13: the original caption
was ‘KEEPING HER GOING’ Doctors Eden and D elbos. ‘I’m afraid her
constitution isn’t all it should be, but we mustn’t give up hope yet.’
SECTION 1 Core Content
Option B The 20th century: International Relations since 1919

PART 1 The Inter-War Years,
1919–39
Focus
Chapters 1–3 of this book  cover a turbulent period of  European history. After
the trauma of the First World War, citizens of European countries were
hoping for peace, prosperity and calm. Instead they got revolutions,
economic depression, international disputes, dictatorships, and in the end a
Second World War. How did this happen?
•  In Chapter 1 you will examine the peace treaties at the end of the First
World War and consider whether they were fair. Some would say that the
peace treaties created problems for the future; others that they were the
fairest they could have been given the very difficult situation after the First
World War.
•  The League of Nations was set up in 1920 t o prevent war between
countries. In Chapter 2 you will evaluate its successes (it did have many)
and its failures (which tend to be remembered rather more than the
successes) and reach your own view on how we should remember the
League – as a success or a failure or something between.
•  Finally in Chapter 3 you will examine the events of the 1930s  which
finally tipped Europe back into war. It is common to blame Hitler and his
foreign policy for this slide to war but this chapter will help you to reach a
balanced view that sees what other factors played a part.
The events in these chapters overlap in time. The timeline below gives you
an overview of the main events you will be studying. It would be helpful if
you made your own copy and added your own notes to it as you study.

1 Were the peace treaties of 1919–
23 fair?
FOCUS POINTS
•  What were the motives and aims of the Big Three at Versailles?
•  Why did all the victors not get everything they wanted?
•  What was the impact of the peace treaty on Germany up to
1923?
•  Could the treaties be justified at the time?

This British cartoon was published in 1919 shortly after the
terms of the Treaty of Versailles had been announced. A
German man is holding the treaty terms which say how much
Germany has to pay for the damage caused by the war.
1  Does he think the Treaty is fair? Why or why not?
2  Does the cartoonist think the Treaty is fair? Why or why not?
3  What is the message of this cartoon?
However long or violent a war is, eventually the oppos ing sides must make
peace. But because war is destructive and leaves a bitter legacy, the
peacemaking after a long conflict can be the hardest job of  all.
The people who had that role in 1919 h ad a particularly hard task. The First
World War involved more countries, using more pow erful weapons, causing
greater casualties and physical destruction, than any war before it. The war
had bankrupted some countries. It led to revolutions in others. There was
bitterness and resentment.
In this post-war atmosphere almost everyone agreed that part of the job of  the
peacemakers was to avoid another war like it – bu t no one agreed how to do
that.
Any treaty is a balancing act. The peacemakers have to keep the victors
happy but ensure that the defeated country accepts the terms of the peace.
Was it really possible to produce a treaty which all sides would have seen as
fair? That’s the key question you will have to think about in this chapter.
You are going to investigate what happened when these peacemakers got
together to draw up the peace treaties.
You will focus on:
•  what the peacemakers were hoping to achieve
•  how they worked
•  what they decided
•  why they decided it.
Then you will reach conclusions about the key question – how ‘fair’ were the
treaties they came up with, which means thinking about:
•  whether people at the time thought the treaties were fair, and why or why
not
•  whether historians (with the benefit of hindsight) think they were fair.
And remember…
the peace process was not just about Germany. Between 1919 a nd 1923 t he
peacemakers drew up five treaties (one for each of the defeated pow ers)
although in this chapter you are going to focus most on the Treaty which dealt
with Germany: the Treaty of Versailles.
Aims of the Big Three: Wilson’s
viewpoint
High hopes for peace
Looking back it may seem that the peacemakers in 1919 h ad an impossible
job. But that is not how people saw it at the time. There was great optimism.
One of the main reasons for these high hopes was the American President
Woodrow Wilson.
In 1918 W ilson made a speech outlining Fourteen Points (see Factfile),
guidelines for a just and lasting peace treaty to end conflict.
When he arrived in Europe for the Paris Peace Conference, Wilson was seen
almost as a saintly figure. Newspaper reports described wounded soldiers in
Italy trying to kiss the hem of his cloak and in France peasant families
kneeling to pray as his train passed by.
Profile
Woodrow Wilson
(President of the USA)
Background
•  Born 1856.
•  Became a university professor.
•  First entered politics in 1910.
•  Became President in 1912 and was re-elected in 1916.
•  From 1914 to 1917 he concentrated on keeping the USA out of
the war.
•  Once the USA had joined the war in 1917, he drew up the
Fourteen Points as the basis for ending the war fairly, so that
future wars could be avoided.
Character
•  An idealist and a reformer.
•  As President, he had campaigned against corruption in politics
and business. However, he had a poor record with regard to the
rights of African Americans.
•  He was obstinate. Once he made his mind up on an issue he was
almost impossible to shift.
Wilson’s ideas
How did Wilson think the peacemakers could build a better and more
peaceful world?
•  Don’t be too harsh on Germany. Wilson did believe Germany should be
punished. But he also believed that if Germany was treated harshly, some
day it would recover and want revenge. He was also concerned that
extremist groups, especially communists, might exploit resentment among
the Germans and communists might even seize pow er in Germany as they
had in Russia in 1917.
•  Strengthen democracy in defeated countries. For Wilson democracy
was a key to peace in Europe. If leaders in defeated nations had to listen to
the views of their people and win their votes those people would not let
their leaders cause another war.
•  Give self-determination to small countries that had once been part of
the European empires. He wanted the different peoples of eastern Europe
(for example, Poles, Czechs and Slovaks) to rule themselves rather than be
part of Austria–Hungary’s empire.
•  International co-operation. Wilson also believed that nations should co-
operate to achieve world peace. This would be achieved through a
‘League of Nations’, Wilson’s most important of the Fourteen Points.
You can see from these principles that Wilson was an idealist. However, he
was not a politician who could be pushed around. For example, he refused to
cancel the debts owed to the USA by Britain and its Allies so that he could
put pressure on them to accept his ideas.
FOCUS TASK 1.1
What were the motives and aims of the Big Three at
Versailles?
Using the information and sources on pages 6–9, fill out a chart like
the one below summarising the aims of the three leaders at the
Paris Peace Conference. Leave the fifth column blank. You will
need it for a later task.
Revision Tip
Your completed chart from the Focus Task should be perfect for
revision on this topic. The basic requirement is to be sure you can
name:
•  each of the Big Three
•  one priority for each of them at the peace talks
•  two issues that they disagreed about.
SOURCE 1
A cartoon published in 1919 in an Australian
newspaper.
Source Analysis
Study the main features of Source 1. Who is making the soup? Who
is helping him? What are they adding to the mix? What is already in
there?
Factfile
The Fourteen Points: a summary
  1  No secret treaties.
  2  Free access to the seas in peacetime or wartime.
  3  Free trade between countries.
  4  All countries to work towards disarmament.
  5  Colonies to have a say in their own future.
  6  German troops to leave Russia.
  7  Independence for Belgium.
  8  France to regain Alsace–Lorraine.
  9  Frontier between Austria and Italy to be adjusted.
10  Self-determination for the peoples of eastern Europe (they
should rule themselves and not be ruled by empires).
11  Serbia to have access to the sea.
12  Self-determination for the people in the Turkish empire.
13  Poland to become an independent state with access to the
sea.
14  League of Nations to be set up.
Factfile
The Paris Peace Conference, 1919–20
•  The Conference took place in the Palace of Versailles (a short
distance from Paris).
•  It lasted for twelve months.
•  Thirty-two nations were supposed to be represented, but no one
from the defeated countries was invited.
•  Five treaties were drawn up at the Conference. The main one
was the Treaty of Versailles, which dealt with Germany. The
other treaties dealt with Germany’s allies.
•  All of the important decisions on the fate of Germany were taken
by Clemenceau (Prime Minister of France), Lloyd George (Prime
Minister of Britain) and Wilson (President of the USA) who
together were known as ‘The Big Three’.
•  The Big Three were supported by a huge army of diplomats and
expert advisers, but the Big Three often ignored their advice.
Did everyone share Wilson’s
viewpoint?
Not surprisingly, when Wilson talked about lasting peace and justice other
leaders agreed with him. After all, who would want to stand up in public and
say they were against a just and lasting peace?!
However, many were doubtful about Wilson’s ideas for achieving it. For
example, ‘self-determination’: it would be very difficult to give the peoples
of eastern Europe the oppor tunity to rule themselves because they were
scattered across many countries. Some people were bound to end up being
ruled by people from another group with different customs and a different
language. Some historians have pointed out that while Wilson talked a great
deal about eastern and central Europe, he did not actually know very much
about the area.
There were other concerns as well. So let’s look at the aims and views of the
other leaders at the Paris Peace Conference: David Lloyd George (from
Britain) and Georges Clemenceau (from France).
Profile
David Lloyd George
(Prime Minister of Britain)
Background
•  Born 1863.
•  First entered politics in 1890.
•  He was a very able politician who became Prime Minister in 1916
and remained in power until 1922.
Character
A realist. As an experienced politician, he knew there would have to
be compromise. Thus he occupied the middle ground between the
views of Wilson and Clemenceau.
Did Lloyd George agree with Wilson?
In public Lloyd George praised Wilson and his ideas. However, in private he
was less positive. He complained to one of his officials that Wilson came to
Paris like a missionary to rescue the European savages with his little
sermons and lectures.
He agreed with Wilson on many issues, particularly that Germany should be
punished but not too harshly. He did not want Germany to seek revenge in the
future and pos sibly start another war.
Like Wilson he was deeply concerned that a harsh treaty might lead to a
communist revolution like the one in Russia in 1917. He also wanted Britain
and Germany to begin trading with each other again. Before the war,
Germany had been Britain’s second largest trading partner. British people
might not like it, but the fact was that trade with Germany meant jobs in
Britain.
However, unlike Wilson, Lloyd George had the needs of the British empire in
mind. He wanted Germany to lose its navy and its colonies because they
threatened the British empire.
SOURCE 2
We want a peace which will be just, but not vindictive. We want a
stern peace because the occasion demands it, but the severity
must be designed, not for vengeance, but for justice. Above all, we
want to protect the future against a repetition of the horrors of this
war.
Lloyd George speaking to the House of
Commons before the Peace Conference.
SOURCE 3
If I am elected, Germany is going to pay … I have personally no
doubt we will get everything that you can squeeze out of a lemon,
and a bit more. I propose that every bit of [German-owned]
property, movable and immovable, in Allied and neutral countries,
whether State property or private property, should be surrendered
by the Germans.
Sir Eric Geddes, a government minister,
speaking to a rally in the general election
campaign, December 1918.
Source Analysis
1  In what ways are Sources 2 and 3 different?
2  Are there any ways in which they are similar?
Pressures on Lloyd George
Lloyd George faced huge public pressures at home for a harsh treaty (see
Source 2). People in Britain were not sympathetic to Germany in any way.
They had suffered ove r 1 million casualties in the fighting, as well as food
shortages and other hardships at home. They had been fed anti-German
propaganda for four years. They had also seen how Germany had treated
Russia in 1918 w hen Russia surrendered. Under the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
Germany had stripped Russia of 25 pe r cent of its popu lation and huge areas
of Russia’s best agricultural land.
Lloyd George had just won the 1918 e lection in Britain by promising to
‘make Germany pay’, even though he realised the dangers of this course of
action. So Lloyd George had to balance these pressures at home with his
desire not to leave Germany wanting revenge.
Profile
Georges Clemenceau
(Prime Minister of France)
Background
•  Born 1841 (he was aged 77 when the Paris Conference began).
•  First entered French politics in 1871.
•  Was Prime Minister of France from 1906 to 1909.
•  From 1914 to 1917 he was very critical of the French war
leaders. In November 1917 he was elected to lead France
through the last year of the war.
Character
A hard, tough politician with a reputation for being uncompromising.
He had seen his country invaded twice by the Germans, in 1870
and in 1914. He was determined not to allow such devastation ever
again.
Did Clemenceau agree with Wilson?
In public, Clemenceau of course agreed with Wilson’s aim for a fair and
lasting peace. However, he found Wilson very hard to work with. While he
did not publicly criticise the Fourteen Points, Clemenceau once pointed out
that even God had only needed Ten Commandments!
The major disagreement was over Germany. Clemenceau and other French
leaders saw the Treaty as an oppor tunity to cripple Germany so that it could
not attack France again.
Pressures on Clemenceau
France had suffered enormous damage to its land, industry, people – and self-
confidence. Over two-thirds of the men who had served in the French army
had been killed or wounded. The war affected almost an entire generation.
By comparison, Germany seemed to many French people as pow erful and
threatening as ever. German land and industry had not been as badly damaged
as France’s. France’s popu lation (around 40 m illion) was in decline
compared to Germany’s (around 75 m illion).
The French people wanted a treaty that would punish Germany and weaken it
as much as possible. The French President (Poincaré) even wanted Germany
broken up into a collection of smaller states, but Clemenceau knew that the
British and Americans would not agree to this.
Clemenceau was a realist and knew he would probably be forced to
compromise on some issues. However, he had to show he was aware of
public opinion in France.
Think!
1  One of the ideas put forward at the Paris Conference was that
Germany should lose some of its key industrial areas. How
would you expect Lloyd George to react to a proposal like this?
You could present your answer as a short speech by Lloyd
George or in a paragraph of text.
2  Here are some extracts from the demands made by France
before the Peace Conference started:
    a)  German armed forces to be banned from the bank of the
River Rhine (which bordered France).
    b)  Germany to pay compensation for damage done by German
forces in lands they occupied during the war.
    c)  Germany’s armed forces to be severely limited.
Which of these terms do you think made it into the final Treaty?
Give each term a percentage chance and keep a note of your
guesses. You will find out if you were right later in the chapter.
How did the peacemaking process
actually work?
In theory, the major issues like borders and reparations (compensation for
war damage) were discussed in detail by all the delegates at the conference
(see Source 4) – ove r 32 leaders with all their officials and advisers! As
Source 5 shows, it quickly became impossible to consult everyone.
SOURCE 4
A painting showing the delegates at the Paris
Peace Conference at work. It was made for
the Illustrated London News, which was a
very popular British newspaper aimed at a
mass market. It was particularly well known
for using paintings even after photography
was well established. The paper’s artists
were given official access to the meetings of
the Peace Conference to report and create
illustrations. This image had the official
approval of the Big Three.
SOURCE 5
‘Wilson the Just’ quickly disappointed expectations. Everything
about him served to disillusion those he dealt with. All too soon the
President was qualifying the Fourteen Points with ‘Four Principles’
and modifying them with ‘Five Particulars’. Finding that one
principle conflicted with another, he made compromising
declarations about both. The Big Three abandoned Wilson’s
principle of open covenants openly arrived at, consulting others
only when they needed expert advice. They were occasionally to
be seen crawling round their maps on the hearth rug. Sometimes
they agreed and, according to one British official ‘were so pleased
with themselves for doing so that they quite forgot to tell anyone
what the agreement was’. Sometimes they almost came to blows.
Lloyd George made rapid, quick fire points but they were
ineffective against Clemenceau’s granite obstinacy. Even Wilson’s
self-important confidence crashed against the rock of Clemenceau
… Clemenceau was delighted when the American President fell ill.
He suggested that Lloyd George should bribe Wilson’s doctor to
make the illness last.
Historian Piers Brendon writing in 2006.
Source Analysis
Study Source 4 carefully and then discuss these questions.
1  Why was this picture published?
2  What impression was it trying to give of the conference and the
delegates?
3  After studying Source 4 and the other information in this section,
do you think the impression is accurate? Make sure you can
explain your view.
4  If you were using this image to introduce a documentary on the
Treaty of Versailles, what main points would you make in the
commentary that the viewer would hear?
It soon became clear it would be impossible to agree terms that everyone
would agree about.
•  Clemenceau clashed with Wilson over many issues. The USA had not
suffered nearly as badly as France in the war. Clemenceau resented
Wilson’s more generous attitude to Germany. They disagreed ove r what to
do about Germany’s Rhineland and coalfields in the Saar. In the end,
Wilson had to give way on these issues. In return, Clemenceau and Lloyd
George did give Wilson what he wanted in eastern Europe, despite their
reservations about his idea of self-determination. However, this mainly
affected the other four treaties, not the Treaty of Versailles.
•  Clemenceau also clashed with Lloyd George, particularly over Lloyd
George’s desire not to treat Germany too harshly. For example,
Clemenceau said that ‘if the British are so anxious to appease Germany
they should look overseas and make colonial, naval or commercial
concessions’. Clemenceau felt that the British were quite happy to treat
Germany fairly in Europe, where France rather than Britain was most
under threat. However, they were less happy to allow Germany to keep its
navy and colonies, which would be more of a threat to Britain.
•  Wilson and Lloyd George did not always agree either. Lloyd George
was particularly unhappy with point 2 of the Fourteen Points, allowing all
nations access to the seas. Similarly, Wilson’s views on people ruling
themselves were threatening to the British government, for the British
empire ruled millions of people all across the world from London.
ACTIVITY
Who said what about whom?
Here are some statements that were made by the Big Three at the
Paris Peace Conference. Your task is to decide which leader made
the statement and also whom he was talking about. You will need to
be able to explain your answer.
a)  ‘He is too anxious to preserve his empire to want self-
determination for colonies.’
b)  ‘His country has been ruling the waves for too long to accept
the need for freedom of the seas.’
c)  ^He wants to wreck a country which in a few years could be a
valuable trading partner and a source of vital jobs.’
d)  ‘Freedom of the seas is all very well but who or what will
protect my country’s ships and trade?’
e)  ‘What does he know about colonies and how they should be
ruled? He probably doesn’t know where most of them are!’
f)  ‘How can I work with a man who thinks he is the first leader in
2000 years who knows anything about peace?’
g)  ‘If he is so anxious to make concessions to the Germans then
they should look overseas and make naval or colonial
concessions.’
h)  ‘He is stuck in the past. If he gets his way Germany will be left
bitter and vengeful and there will be another war in a few
years.’
i)  ‘He is very happy to give concessions to Germany in areas
which do not threaten his country.’
j)  ‘If you carry on annoying me I am going to punch you!’
k)  ‘There are new, better ways of making a peace agreement. He
should accept that all states should disarm.’
l)  ‘He must make concessions to the Germans, perhaps over the
Rhineland or Alsace–Lorraine.’
The terms of the Treaty of Versailles
None of the Big Three was happy with the eventual terms of the Treaty. After
months of negotiation, each of them had to compromise on some of their
aims, otherwise there would never have been a treaty.
The main terms can be divided into five areas.
1 War guiltThis clause was simple but was seen by the Germans
as extremely harsh. Germany had to accept the blame
for starting the war.
2
ReparationsThe major powers agreed, without consulting
Germany, that Germany had to pay reparations to the
Allies for the damage caused by the war. The exact
figure was not agreed until 1921 when it was set at
£6,600 million – an enormous figure. If the terms of
the payments had not later been changed under the
Young Plan in 1929 (see page 250), Germany would
not have finished paying this bill until 1984.
3 German
territories
and
colonies•  Germany’s European borders were very extensive,
and the section dealing with German territory in
Europe was a complicated part of the Treaty. You
can see the detail in Figure 6. In addition to these
changes, the Treaty also forbade Germany to join
together (ANSCHLUSS) with its former ally Austria.
FIGURE 6
Map showing the impact of the Treaty of
Versailles on the borders of Europe.
 •  Germany’s overseas empire was taken away. It had
been one of the causes of bad relations between
Britain and Germany before the war. Former German
colonies, such as Cameroon, became mandates
controlled by the League of Nations, which effectively
meant that France and Britain controlled them.
4
Germany’s
armed
forcesThe size and power of the German army was a major
concern, especially for France. The Treaty therefore
restricted German armed forces to a level well below
what they had been before the war.
•  The army was limited to 100,000 men.
•  CONSCRIPTION was banned – soldiers had to be
volunteers.
•  Germany was not allowed armoured vehicles,
submarines or aircraft.
•  The navy could have only six battleships.
•  The Rhineland became a DEMILITARISED zone. This
meant that no German troops were allowed into that
area. The Rhineland was important because it was
the border area between Germany and France (see
Figure 6).
5 League
of Nations•  Previous methods of keeping peace had failed and so
the League of Nations was set up as an international
‘police force’. (You will study the League in detail in
Chapter 2.)
•  Germany was not invited to join the League until it
had shown that it was a peace-loving country.
Revision Tip
The more you know about the Treaty of Versailles, the more it will
help you. Make sure you can remember one or two key points
under each of these headings:
•  Blame
•  Reparations
•  Arms
•  Territory.
FOCUS TASK 1.2
Why did the victors not get everything they wanted?
1  Work in threes. Look back at the profiles of Wilson, Lloyd
George and Clemenceau on pages 6, 8 and 9. Choose one
each. Study the terms of the Treaty on these two pages. Think
about:
    a)  which terms of the Treaty would please your chosen leader
and why
    b)  which terms would displease him and why
    c)  how far he seemed to have achieved his aims.
    d)  Report your findings to your partners.
2  Look back at the chart you compiled on page 6. There should be
a blank fifth column. Put the heading ‘How they felt about the
Treaty’ and fill it in for each leader with a one-sentence
summary.
3  a)  Choose one of the following phrases to finish off this
sentence:
The victors did not all get what they wanted because …
            –  Clemenceau bullied Wilson and Lloyd George into
agreeing to a harsh treaty.
            –  the leaders’ aims were too different – they could not all
have got what they wanted and someone was bound to
be disappointed.
            –  public opinion in their home countries affected the
leaders’ decisions.
    b)  Write a paragraph to explain why you chose that phrase.
    c)  Write two more paragraphs to explain whether there is
evidence to support the other two.
FOCUS TASK 1.3
Was the Treaty of Versailles fair?
It is important to make up your own mind about this key question
and be able to back up your view with evidence and arguments. So
place yourself on this scale and write some sentences to explain
your position. This is provisional. You will return to it again.
German reactions to the Treaty of
Versailles
The government that took Germany to war in 1914 h ad been overthrown in a
revolution and the new democratic government in Germany was hoping for
fair and equal treatment from the Allies. When the terms were announced on
7 May the Germans were horrified. Their reasons are summarised in the
diagram oppos ite.
The new German government refused to sign the Treaty and the German navy
sank its own ships in protest. At one point, it looked as though war might
break out again. But what could the German leader Friedrich Ebert do?
Germany would quickly be defeated if it tried to fight.
Reluctantly, Ebert agreed to accept the terms of the Treaty and it was signed
on 28 J une 1919.
SOURCE 7
THE TREATY IS ONLY A SCRAP OF PAPER! We will seek
vengeance for the shame of 1919.
German newspaper Deutsche Zeitung, June
1919.
SOURCE 8
Cartoon from the German magazine
Simplicissimus, June 1919. The caption in
the magazine read: ‘The Allies are burying
Germany with the peace terms.’
Source Analysis
Study Source 8. If you did not know this source was German would
you be able to work this out? Explain how.
German criticisms of the Treaty of Versailles
War guilt and reparations
Germany had to accept the blame for starting the war and
therefore had to pay reparations.
•  This ‘war guilt’ clause was particularly hated. Germans did not
feel they had started the war. They felt at the very least that
blame should be shared.
•  They were bitter that Germany was expected to pay for all the
damage caused by the war even though the German economy
was severely weakened.
German territories
Germany certainly lost a lot of territory
•  10 per cent of its land in Europe
•  All of its overseas colonies
•  12.5 per cent of its population
•  16 per cent of its coalfields and almost half of its iron and steel
industry.
This was a major blow to German pride, and to its economy. Both
the Saar and Upper Silesia were important industrial areas.
Meanwhile, as Germany was losing colonies, the British and
French were increasing their empires by taking control of German
territories in Africa.
Disarmament
The German army was reduced to 100,000 men. It could have no
air force, and only a tiny navy.
Germans felt these terms were very unfair. An army of 100,000
was very small for a country of Germany’s size and the army was
a symbol of German pride.
Also, despite Wilson’s Fourteen Points calling for disarmament,
none of the Allies were being asked or forced to disarm in the
same way.
The Fourteen Points and the League of Nations
•  To most Germans, the treatment of Germany was not in keeping
with Wilson’s Fourteen Points. For example, while self-
determination was given to countries such as Estonia, Latvia and
Lithuania, German-speaking peoples were being hived off into
new countries such as Czechoslovakia to be ruled by non-
Germans. Anschluss (union) with Austria was forbidden.
•  Germany felt further insulted by not being invited to join the
League of Nations.
Non-representation
Germans were angry that their government was not represented at
the peace talks and that they were being forced to accept a harsh
treaty without any choice or even comment. Germans did not feel
they had lost the war so they should not have been treated as a
defeated country.
SOURCE 9
A mass meeting in Berlin in June 1919
protesting against the Treaty of Versailles.
Consequences of the Treaty for
Germany
The Treaty of Versailles had a profound effect on Germany for the next ten
years and more. The Treaty was universally resented. The historian Zara
Steiner argues that hatred of the Versailles Treaty was almost the only issue
which all Germans in this period agreed on.
Political violence
Right-wing oppon ents of Ebert’s government could not bear the Treaty. In
1920 t hey attempted a revolution. This rising, called the Kapp Putsch, was
defeated by a GENERAL STRIKE by Berlin workers which paralysed essential
services such as pow er and transport. It saved Ebert’s government but it
added to the chaos in Germany – and the bitterness of Germans towards the
Treaty.
Although Kapp w as defeated, pol itical violence remained a constant threat.
There were numerous political assassinations or attempted assassinations. In
the summer of 1922 G ermany’s foreign minister Walther Rathenau was
murdered by extremists. Then in November 1923 A dolf Hitler led an
attempted rebellion in Munich, known as the Munich Putsch (see page 253).
Hitler’s rebellion was defeated but he was let off lightly when he was put on
trial and it was clear many Germans shared his hatred of Versailles. Over the
next ten years he exploited German resentment of the Treaty of Versailles to
gain support for himself and his Nazi party.
SOURCE 10
A German poster from 1923 showing a
German worker refusing to obey the French
troops ordering him to work. The caption
says ‘No, you can’t force me’.
Source Analysis
Study Source 10. The artist had a difficult aim to achieve because
he wanted to show the German worker as strong and determined
but at the same time being threatened by the French troops. Do you
think he has achieved this aim? Explain which elements of the poster
led you to this conclusion.
Conflict in the Ruhr
Under the Treaty Germany agreed to pay £6,600 m illion in reparations to the
Allies. The first instalment of £50 m illion was paid in 1921, bu t in 1922
nothing was paid. Ebert tried to negotiate concessions from the Allies, but
the French ran out of patience. In 1923 F rench and Belgian soldiers entered
the Ruhr region and simply took what was owed to them in the form of raw
materials and goods . This was quite legal under the Treaty of Versailles.
The results of the occupation of the Ruhr were disastrous for Germany. The
German government ordered the workers to go on strike so that they were not
producing anything for the French to take. The French reacted harshly, killing
over 100 w orkers and expelling over 100,000 pr otesters from the region.
More importantly, the strike meant that Germany had no goods  to trade, and
no money to buy things with. Their response led, in turn, to hyperinflation
(see page 17).
There is much debate about the developments in the Ruhr. Most Germans
believed that the crisis arose because the reparations were too high and
Germany was virtually bankrupted. Many commentators at the time
(including the British and French leaders) claimed that Germany was quite
able to afford reparations: it just did not want to pay! Some historians argue
that Germany stoppe d paying reparations in order to create a crisis and force
the international community to revise the terms of the Treaty. The debate goes
on, but there is no dou bt that most Germans at the time believed the Treaty
was responsible for the crisis and that the reparations were far too high.
Hyperinflation
The government solved the problem of not having enough money by simply
printing extra money, but this caused a new problem – hyperinflation. The
money was virtually worthless, so prices shot up. The price of goods  could
rise between joining the back of a queue in a shop and reaching the front (see
page 248)! Wages began to be paid daily instead of weekly.
Some Germans gained from this disaster. The government and big
industrialists were able to pay off their huge debts in worthless marks. But
others, especially pensioners, were practically left penniless. A prosperous
middle-class family would find that their savings, which might have bought a
house in 1921, by  1923 w ould not even buy a loaf of bread.
SOURCE 11
A German banknote of 1923 for one billion
marks.
SOURCE 12
Billion mark notes were quickly handed on as though they burned
one’s fingers, for tomorrow one would no longer pay in notes but in
bundles of notes … One afternoon I rang Aunt Louise’s bell. The
door was opened merely a crack. From the dark came an odd
broken voice: ‘I’ve used 60 billion marks’ worth of gas. My milk bill
is 1 million. But all I have left is 2000 marks. I don’t understand any
more.’
Extract from Convert to Freedom by Eitel
Dobert, published in 1941. Dobert was a
writer and lecturer and joined the Nazi party
in 1920.
Germany eventually recovered from this disaster, but it left a bitter memory.
The bitterness was directed towards the Treaty of Versailles. It is no
coincidence that when Germany faced economic problems again in 1929
many Germans believed Hitler’s claims that the Treaty was to blame and they
should support his plans to ove rturn it.
Summary
While the Treaty did cause some genuine problems for Germany the
important thing to realise is that many Germans blamed it for other problems
which had little to do w ith it. This resentment was then in turn exploited by
extreme groups in Germany to gain pow er and influence for themselves.
Revision Tip
There were two problems Germany faced in the period 1919–23:
•  political violence, and
•  hyperinflation.
Make sure you can explain how each one was linked to the Treaty
of Versailles.
FOCUS TASK 1.4
What was the impact of the peace treaty on Germany up to
1923?
Summarise the impact of the Treaty on Germany under each of
these headings:
a)  Political impact
b)  Economic impact
c)  Impact on morale
How was the Treaty seen at the time?
It was unfair!
Some said the Treaty was unfair!
None of the Big Three was happy with the Treaty (although for different
reasons) and some of the diplomats who helped shape the Treaty were
dissatisfied.
SOURCE 13
The historian, with every justification, will come to the conclusion
that we were very stupid men … We arrived determined that a
Peace of justice and wisdom should be negotiated; we left the
conference conscious that the treaties imposed upon our enemies
were neither just nor wise.
Harold Nicolson, a British official who
attended the talks.
Some commentators at the time believed that the Treaty was unfair and unjust
(see Source 13 for example).
Source 14 is probably the most famous cartoon produced about the Treaty of
Versailles. The artist, Will Dyson, thought that the peacemakers were blind
and selfish and as a result they produced a disastrous treaty that would cause
another terrible war. It is a pow erful cartoon. Because history proved it right
(the cartoonist even gets the date of the Second World War almost right) this
cartoon has been reproduced many times ever since, including in millions of
school textbook s.
SOURCE 14
A cartoon published in the socialist
newspaper The Daily Herald in 1919.
Another pow erful critic of the Treaty was a British economist, John Maynard
Keynes. He wrote a very critical book  called The Econom ic Consequences
of The Peace published in 1919. This book  was widely read and accepted
and has influenced the way people have looked at the Treaty.
It is easy to think that everyone felt this way about the Treaty – bu t they did
not!
It was fair!
Others said the Treaty was fair!
At the time German complaints about the Treaty mostly fell on deaf ears.
There were celebrations in Britain and France. If ordinary people in Britain
had any reservations about the Treaty it was more likely to be that it was not
harsh enough.
•  Many people felt that the Germans were themselves operating a double
standard. Their call for fairer treatment did not square with the harsh way
they had treated Russia in the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk in 1918. Versailles
was a much less harsh treaty than Brest-Litovsk. This is the comment being
made in the cartoon on page 4.
•  There was also the fact that Germany’s economic problems, although real,
were partly self-inflicted. Other states had raised taxes to pay for the war.
The Kaiser’s government had not done this. It had simply allowed debts to
mount up because it had planned to pay Germany’s war debts by extracting
reparations from the defeated states.
SOURCE 15
The Germans have given in … They writhe at the obligation
imposed on them to confess their guilt … Some of the conditions,
they affirm, are designed to deprive the German people of its
honour … They thought little of the honour of the nations whose
territories they defiled with their barbarous and inhuman warfare for
more than three awful years.
British newspaper The Times, 24 June 1919.
SOURCE 16
A British cartoon published in 1919.
SOURCE 17
Terms of Treaty Better Than Germany Deserves
WAR MAKERS MUST BE MADE TO SUFFER
Germany’s chickens are coming home to roost, and she is making
no end of a song about it. That was expected, but it will not help
her much … If Germany had her deserts, indeed, there would be
no Germany left to bear any burden at all; she would be wiped off
the map of Europe … Stern justice would demand for Germany a
punishment 10 times harder than any she will have to bear …
The feeling in this country is not that Germany is being too hardly
dealt by, but that she is being let off too lightly.
From the British newspaper The People, May
1919.
Source Analysis
1  Study Source 16. On your own copy, analyse Source 16 the way
we have analysed Source 14 on page 18.
2  What does Source 16 reveal about British opinions on the Treaty?
How has the Treaty been seen with
hindsight?
Looking back at the Treaty from the present day we know that it helped to
create the cruel Nazi regime in Germany and helped cause the Second World
War.
As early as 1933–34 t he British historian W.H. Dawson was arguing that the
Versailles settlement was a major cause of the rise of Hitler’s aggressive
Nazi regime in Germany (see Source 19). And while many later historians
disagreed with Dawson about the Treaty, they did agree that Hitler was able
to exploit the way Germans felt about the Treaty (see Sources 18 and 20).
SOURCE 18
The Versailles Treaty was one of the most outrageous and
predatory treaties in history. It was a blatant act of plunder
perpetrated by a gang of robbers against a helpless, prostrate and
bleeding Germany. Among its numerous provisions, it required
Germany and its allies to accept full responsibility for causing the
war and, under the terms of articles 231–248, to disarm, make
substantial territorial concessions and pay reparations to the
Entente powers.
An extract from an article on the website ‘In
Defence of Marxism’, published in 2009. The
title of the article was ‘The Treaty of
Versailles – the Peace to end all Peace’.
SOURCE 19
The rise of Hitler to power and the resurgence of militant
nationalism throughout Germany is alarming. Hitler is certain to
demand a reconsideration of the territorial provision in the
Versailles settlement. These demands, in a country which was
supposedly defeated and restrained indefinitely, serve as a warning
to the powers who wish to defend peace and stability in Europe.
They are also a reminder that nations tend to be slow to accept the
truth of a given situation unless they are forced to. Germany’s
claims of unfair treatment under the settlement have been clarified
and strengthened from year to year with the findings of impartial
research by myself and other colleagues. No attempt was made by
the victorious powers at Versailles to respect the rights and valid
claims of Germany.
British historian W.H. Dawson writing in 1933.
SOURCE 20
Hitler used the Treaty of Versailles of 1919 to raise the European
storms that Britain and France wanted to calm in the 1930s. Hitler’s
demands for the destruction of Versailles won him support at home
and also allowed him to disguise his true ambitions to build a great
empire from the German people and from foreign statesmen. Most
Germans wished to change Versailles and so they supported Hitler.
Even in Britain, Hitler’s demands did not seem to be completely
unacceptable. To the British, if Hitler’s only purpose was to modify
the Versailles settlement then it seemed reasonable to listen to him
and give concessions. The grievances of Versailles provided Hitler
with the means to appeal to German and foreign support for
demands over territory and reparations. Indeed, to British
observers the history of reparations came to be seen as the history
of a grave and very large mistake.
British historian R.A.C. Parker writing in
1993.
We call this hindsight – when you look back at a historical event and judge it
knowing its consequences. You would expect hindsight to affect historians’
attitudes to the Treaty and it has – bu t maybe not exactly as you might expect.
Some historians side with critics of the Treaty and its makers. Others point
out that the majority of people outside Germany thought that the Treaty was
fair and that a more generous treaty would have been totally unacceptable to
public opinion in Britain and France. They highlight that the peacemakers had
a very difficult job ba lancing public opinion in their own countries with
visions of a fairer future. Some say that the Treaty may have been the best
that could be achieved in the circumstances.
Think!
Look back at your work in Focus Task 1.3 on page 13. Have you
changed your views after reading the information and sources on
pages 18–20?
SOURCE 21
Nazi cartoon commenting on the military
terms of the Versailles Treaty. The text
reads: ‘The Mammoth Military superiority of
our neighbours’. The soldier’s symbol =
military treaties; F = peace time strength; R =
reserves; the German Reich is surrounded by
Belgium, Czechoslovakia, Poland and France
(left to right).
SOURCE 22
A demonstration against the Treaty of
Versailles in 1933. The march was organised
by the Nazi Party. The banners read ‘Day of
Versailles, day of dishonour!’ and ‘We would
be free from Versailles!’
Source Analysis
Study Sources 21 and 22. Explain how the authors of Sources 19
and 20 could have used these as evidence to support their ideas.
SOURCE 23
The Treaty of Versailles has been repeatedly pilloried [criticised],
most famously in John Maynard Keynes’ The Economic
Consequences of the Peace, published at the end of 1919 and still
the argument underpinning too many current textbooks … The
Treaty of Versailles was not excessively harsh. Germany was not
destroyed. Nor was it reduced to a second rank power or
permanently prevented from returning to great power status … With
the disintegration of Austria-Hungary and the collapse of Tsarist
Russia it left Germany in a stronger strategic position than before
the war … The Versailles Treaty was, nonetheless, flawed. It failed
to solve the problem of both punishing and conciliating a country
that remained a great power despite the four years of fighting and a
military defeat. It could hardly have been otherwise, given the very
different aims of the peacemakers, not to speak of the many
problems they faced, many of which lay beyond their competence
or control.
Historian Zara Steiner writing in 2004.
SOURCE 24
The peacemakers of 1919 made mistakes, of course. By their
offhand treatment of the non-European world they stirred up
resentments for which the West is still paying today. They took
pains over the borders in Europe, even if they did not draw them to
everyone’s satisfaction, but in Africa they carried on the old
practice of handing out territory to suit the imperialist powers. In the
Middle East they threw together peoples, in Iraq most notably, who
still have not managed to cohere into a civil society. [But] they
could have done much worse. They tried, even cynical old
Clemenceau, to build a better order. They could not foresee the
future and they certainly could not control it. That was up to their
successors. When war came in 1939, it was a result of twenty
years of decisions taken or not taken, not of arrangements made in
1919.
Historian Margaret MacMillan writing in
Peacemakers, 2001.
FOCUS TASK 1.5
Could the Treaty of Versailles be justified at the time?
1  Study Sources 18–24 carefully. Match one source to each of
these headlines:
    •  The best that could be achieved in the circumstances
    •  They did what the people wanted
    •  A death warrant for Europe
    •  Betrayal.
2  For each source, decide whether you think it is a critical, positive
or balanced view of the Treaty.
3  Now look back at the previous section on views from the time.
Write a paragraph explaining how far you agree with this
statement: ‘The views of the Treaty with hindsight are generally
kinder than the views expressed at the time.’
The other peace settlements
The Treaty of Versailles dealt with Germany, but Germany had allies in the
First World War (Austria–Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey). These allies also
had to disarm and pay reparations. There were four other treaties which dealt
with them. These treaties were not negotiated by the Big Three but by
officers and diplomats working with the foreign ministers of the Allied
powers. The treaties were made in consultation with representatives of the
nationalities in eastern and central Europe (except those of the defeated
countries). Because the empire of Austria–Hungary collapsed in 1918, t he
treaties made eastern Europe a ‘patchwork’ of new states.
The Versailles Treaty usually gets the most attention but these other treaties
were important, too. They attempted to solve incredibly complex and serious
problems. They set out what Europe and the Middle East would look like for
the next few decades, and in many ways these treaties still have a pow erful
impact on the world today. Looking at the other treaties may also help you to
decide whether you think the Treaty of Versailles was fair.
Austria: The Treaty of St Germain, 1919
This treaty separated Austria from Hungary and confirmed that Austria was
no longer a leading pow er. Under the treaty, Austrian territories were
divided as follows:
FIGURE 25
The impact of the Treaty of St Germain on
Austria.
Territory From Austria to
Bohemia–Moravianew state of Czechoslovakia
Bosnia–
Herzegovina,
Croatianew state of Yugoslavia (which also included
the former kingdom of Serbia)
Austria also lost Galicia to Poland and land to Italy. Its army was restricted
to 30,000 a nd it was forbidden ever to unite with Germany. The old Austrian
empire had already collapsed by 1918 a nd many new states had already been
set up. The Treaty of St Germain was really about sorting out a chaotic
jumble of territories into new states rather than punishing Austria. One state
that was not entirely happy, however, was Italy, which felt it should have
received more land. On the other hand, many millions in eastern Europe were
given self-determination and freedom to rule themselves.
Austria suffered severe economic problems after the war, as much of its
industry had gone to Czechoslovakia. Other areas also suffered
economically, because they were suddenly part of foreign states. Whereas
once the markets they sold to had been in one empire, now they were in
different countries.
FIGURE 26

The impact of the Treaty of Neuilly on
Bulgaria.
Bulgaria: The Treaty of Neuilly, 1919
Bulgaria did well compared with Germany, Austria and Hungary. However,
it lost lands to Greece, Romania and Yugoslavia and lost its access to the
Mediterranean. It, too, h ad to limit its armed forces to 20,000 a nd pay £100
million in reparations.
Bulgaria had played a relatively small part in the war and was treated less
harshly than its allies. Nevertheless, many Bulgarians were governed by
foreign pow ers by 1920.
FIGURE 27

The impact of the Treaty of Trianon on
Hungary.
Hungary: The Treaty of Trianon, 1920
This treaty was not signed until 1920 bu t, like that of St Germain, its main
terms involved the transfer of territories. Hungary lost a substantial amount
of its territory and its popu lation (three million Hungarians ended up in other
states).
Its industries suffered from the loss of popu lation and raw materials. It was
due to pay reparations, but its economy was so weak it never did.
Turkey: The Treaty of Sevres, 1920
This Treaty was signed in August 1920. As you can see from Figure 28,
Turkey lost a substantial amount of territory and its original empire was
broken up. Most historians agree it was a harsh treaty. As well as losing the
territories shown in Figure 28, parts of Turkey were defined as zones of
influence controlled by the British, French or Italians. Armenia and
Kurdistan became independent regions. Turkey’s tax system, finances and
budget were to be controlled by the Allies. Turkey’s army was limited to
50,000 t roops . Its navy was restricted and it was not allowed an air force at
all. Turkey had long been a great and proud empire, and Turks were angered
and humiliated by the terms.
FIGURE 28
The impact of the Treaty of Sevres on
Turkey.
What were the Allies trying to achieve?
All of the Big Three agreed that Turkey’s time as a great pow er had to end.
Turkey had been unstable for some time. Many of its people (including
Greeks, Armenians and Arab peoples) wanted independence so in public the
Allies said that the Treaty should try to establish stable new states in eastern
Europe and the Middle East. They agreed that Turkey would be punished for
supporting Germany in the war.
President Wilson was keen for Armenia to become an independent state and
that Armenians should rule themselves.
However, behind the scenes, Italy essentially wanted Turkish territory as a
reward for supporting the Allies in the First World War. France and Britain
wanted to strengthen or extend their empires and especially their commercial
interests. France, Britain and Italy actually signed a secret Tripartite
Agreement in August 1920 i n which they effectively protected their
commercial interests. Britain was particularly interested in the oilfields of
Iraq and already had a large involvement in the oil industry of neighbouring
Iran.
Britain had made promises to Arab peoples in return for their help in the war
but was effectively unable or unwilling to honour these promises.
Did the Treaty bring peace and stability?
The simple answer is no!
Originally the Turkish government intended to accept the Treaty even though
almost all Turks were outraged by its terms. However, Turkish nationalists
under Mustafa Kemal Pasha set up a new Grand Assembly. They stoppe d the
government signing the treaty and began to reverse the Treaty terms by force.
The nationalists were unable to restore the Turkish empire’s territories but
they drove the Greeks out of Smyrna and forced the French to negotiate
withdrawing from Turkish territory. They reached terms with the British over
access to the Straits.
Wilson was unable to get support at home for his policies on Armenia.
Armenia was forced to abandon its hope of becoming an independent state
and opt ed to become part of the Soviet Union rather than be forced to become
part of Turkey. There were many alleged atrocities in the fighting, such as the
burning of Smyrna. However, the most controversial was the forced
movement and mass killing of Armenians, which today is regarded as
genocide by Armenians and most historians although Turkey rejects this
claim bitterly.
Treaty of Lausanne, 1923
Eventually the changes that the Turks had brought about were recognised in
the Treaty of Lausanne. Smyrna, Anatolia and parts of Thrace became
Turkish lands. Turkey’s borders were fixed more or less as they are today.
ACTIVITY
The historian Robert Gerwarth published a book in 2016 about the
‘other’ treaties. He called it The Vanquished: Why the First World
War Failed to End, 1917–23.
Based on what you have read in Chapter 1 answer these questions:
•  Whom do you think he means by ‘The Vanquished’?
•  What might he mean by the war ‘failing to end’?
Then go online and read the book blurb to see if you were right.
Revision Tip
It will help you answer questions about the period if you can name
at least one of the other peace treaties and compare it with
Versailles. The Treaty of Sevres is a good treaty to focus on. Make
sure you can explain:
•  who it affected
•  one way in which it was similar to the Treaty of Versailles, and
•  one way in which it was different.
Make sure you reach your own judgement on whether it was fairer
or less fair than the Treaty of Versailles and that you can back up
that opinion with evidence.
FOCUS TASK 1.6
Were the peace treaties fair?
The key question for this topic is ‘Were the peace treaties fair?’ If
you compare the Treaty of Versailles with another treaty it should
help you reach a more informed judgement.
Feature of the
Treaty of
SevresSimilar to or different from
the treatment of Germany
under the Treaty of
Versailles?Give examples
Allies wanted
to punish
TurkeySimilar. Clemenceau in
particular
wanted to
cripple
Germany
Allies wanted
to achieve
peace and
stability  
Allies had
differing aims  
Allies looked
after their own
interests  
Treaty terms
were imposed
on Turkish
government  
Strict controls
on Turkish
military  
Control of
Turkey’s
finances  
Loss of
territories  
Loss of empire  
Foreign forces
controlling
areas of Turkey  
Resentment of
Turkish people  
Violent
resistance
against terms  
Renegotiated   
1  Column 1 of the table lists some features of the Treaty of
Sevres. Make your own copy of the table then fill in columns 2
and 3 to compare it with the Treaty of Versailles. For each row
think about whether Germany was treated in a similar way to
Turkey or reacted in a similar way to Turkey. Record your
conclusions about each feature in column 2 and examples in
column 3.
2  Now reach your overall judgement: do you think that the Treaty
of Sevres was more or less fair than the Treaty of Versailles?
Make sure you can give reasons.
Keywords
Make sure you know what these terms mean and are able to define
them confidently:
•  Anschluss
•  Big Three
•  conscription
•  co-operation
•  demilitarised zone
•  democracy
•  disarmament
•  Fourteen Points
•  free trade
•  general strike
•  hindsight
•  hyperinflation
•  idealist/realist
•  Kapp Putsch
•  League of Nations
•  mandates
•  Paris Peace Conference
•  public opinion
•  reparations
•  Rhineland
•  right-wing
•  Ruhr
•  Saar
•  secret treaties
•  self-determination
•  territories
•  Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
•  Treaty of Versailles
•  war guilt
•  Young Plan
Chapter Summary
The peace treaties after the First World War
  1  The Paris Peace Conference was set up to sort out what would
happen to the defeated countries after the First World War.
  2  The Conference was dominated by ‘The Big Three’: Wilson,
Clemenceau and Lloyd George representing the USA, France
and Britain (the countries that won the war).
  3  The Big Three did not agree on many things. In particular they
disagreed on how to treat Germany, the League of Nations and
Wilson’s Fourteen Points.
  4  There were a number of Treaties – one for each of the
defeated countries. The Treaty of Versailles was the treaty that
dealt with Germany.
  5  The main terms of the Treaty of Versailles were that Germany
should accept blame for starting the war, pay reparations, lose
land (including industry and population) and colonies, and agree
to disarm.
  6  People in Germany were appalled by the Treaty, but Germany
had no choice but to sign it.
  7  Germany had many post-war problems such as attempted
revolutions and hyperinflation, which they blamed on the Treaty,
but the Treaty was not the sole reason for these problems.
  8  The Treaty also set up a League of Nations whose role was to
enforce the Treaty of Versailles and to help prevent another
war.
  9  Opinion on the Treaty of Versailles varied at the time: some
people thought it was too lenient on Germany, others that it was
too harsh and would lead to Germany wanting revenge.
10  The other treaties dealt with Germany’s allies and were built on
similar principles to the Treaty of Versailles.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  What were the main terms of the Treaty of Versailles? [4]
    (b)  Why did the Treaty of Versailles have an important impact on
Germany up to 1923? [6]
    (c)  ‘The Treaty of Versailles was fair on Germany.’ How far do
you agree with this statement? Explain your answer. [10]
2  Study Source 14 on page 18. What is the message of the
cartoonist? Explain your answer by using details of the source
and your own knowledge. [7]
3  Study Source 15 on page 19. Does this source prove that the
Versailles settlement was fair to Germany? Explain your answer
by using details of the source and your own knowledge. [7]
These are examples of the types of questions on this topic you
might face in an exam. There is more guidance on answering such
questions on pages 172–190 but the key thing, always, is to
answer the question rather than write everything you know.
2 To what extent was the League
of Nations a success?
FOCUS POINTS
•  How successful was the League in the 1920s?
•  How far did weaknesses in the League’s organisation make
failure inevitable?
•  How far did the Depression make the work of the League more
difficult?
•  How successful was the League in the 1930s?

This picture was used as the menu card for a League of
Nations banquet in the 1930s. It shows Briand (who was one
of the most influential figures in the League) as Moses leading
the statesmen of the world to view the ‘Promised Land’. The
sunrise is labelled ‘The United States of Europe’. Discuss:
1  What impression does this picture give you of the League?
2  Does this picture surprise you? Why or why not?
You saw in Chapter 1 that setting up a League of Nations was one of
Woodrow Wilson’s key ideas for preventing another war. He saw the League
as an organisation that would solve international disputes. He hoped that if
the Great Powers had to talk to each other they would no longer need or even
want to make secret ALLIANCES as they did before the First World War. He
thought the League would protect smaller nations from aggression – if they
had concerns then the League would be a place where their case would be
heard by the world.
Without spoiling the story Wilson’s original plan for the League never
happened! This chapter will explain why. However, a scaled-down version
of the League was created. How well did it do?
On the one hand people argue that the League achieved a lot.
•  Its humanitarian agencies helped the sick, the poor  and the homeless.
•  Its financial agencies helped to stabilise several economies after the war.
•  The League handled 66 m ajor international disputes between the wars and
was successful in half of them.
However, the League was unsuccessful in the larger international disputes
that involved the major pow ers. The League failed to stop the Japanese
invasion of Manchuria in 1931 a nd Italy’s invasion of Abyssinia in 1935,
which had disastrous consequences for international relations in Europe.
So your key question in this chapter is to judge to what extent the League
succeeded. This is not a question with a ‘Yes’ or ‘No’ answer. To tackle a
‘to what extent’ question you need to:
•  weigh the League’s successes against its failures
•  compare the aims of the League with what it actually achieved
•  assess whether the failures were the fault of the League or other factors,
and particularly:
    –  h ow far the League’s organisation weakened it
    –  h ow far the League was let dow n by its own members and the other
Great Powers
    –  h ow far the League’s work was hampered by the worldwide ECONOMIC
DEPRESSION that made the 1930s  a dark and dangerous time.
This chapter takes you step by step through those questions so you can reach
your own view on this key question: ‘To what extent was the League of
Nations a success?’
2.1 How successful was the League in
the 1920s?
The birth of the League
SOURCE 1
The front page of the Daily Express, 27
December 1918. Following the Allied victory
in the First World War, President Woodrow
Wilson was given a rapturous reception by
ordinary people wherever he went in Europe.
Source Analysis
1  Study Source 1. Explain why it is useful as evidence about the
state of international relations in December 1918.
2  Some commentators at the time said that they found Wilson to be
pompous and arrogant. Is there any evidence to support this in
Sources 2 and 3?
After the First World War everyone wanted to avoid repeating the mass
slaughter of the war that had just ended. They also agreed that a LEAGUE OF
NATIONS – an organisation that could solve international problems without
resorting to war – would help achieve this. However, there was
disagreement about what kind of organisation it should be.
•  President Wilson wanted the League of Nations to be like a world
parliament where representatives of all nations could meet together
regularly to decide on any matters that affected them all.
•  Many British leaders thought the best League would be a simple
organisation that would just get together in emergencies. An organisation
like this already existed. It was called the CONFERENCE OF AMBASSADORS.
•  France propos ed a strong League with its own army.
SOURCE 2
Merely to win the war was not enough. It must be won in such a
way as to ensure the future peace of the world.
President Woodrow Wilson, 1918.
Think!
Which of the three kinds of League proposed by the Allies do you
think would be the best at keeping peace:
•  a world parliament
•  a simple organisation for emergencies only
•  a strong organisation with its own army?
It was President Wilson who won. He insisted that discussions about a
League should be a major part of the peace treaties and in 1919 h e took
personal charge of drawing up plans for the League. By February he had
drafted a very ambitious plan.
All the major nations would join the League. They would disarm. If they had
a dispute with another country, they would take it to the League. They
promised to accept the decision made by the League. They also promised to
protect one another if they were invaded. If any member did break the
COVENANT (see page 34) and go to war, other members promised to stop
trading with it and to send troops  if necessary to force it to stop fighting.
Wilson’s hope was that citizens of all countries would be so much against
another conflict that this would prevent their leaders from going to war.
The plan was prepared in a great hurry and critics suggested there was some
woolly thinking. Some people were angered by Wilson’s arrogant style. He
acted as if only he knew the solutions to Europe’s problems. Others were
worried by his idealism. Under threat of war, would the public really behave
in the way he suggested? Would countries really do w hat the League said?
Wilson glossed ove r what the League would do i f they didn’t.
SOURCE 3
[If the European powers] had dared to discuss their problems for a
single fortnight in 1914 the First World War would never have
happened. If they had been forced to discuss them for a whole
year, war would have been inconceivable.
President Wilson speaking in 1918.
Even so, most people in Europe were prepared to give Wilson’s plans a try.
They hoped that no country would dare invade another if they knew that the
USA and other pow erful nations of the world would stop trading with them
or send their armies to stop them. In 1919 h opes were high that the League,
with the United States in the driving seat, could be a pow erful peacemaker.
SOURCE 4A
SOURCE 4B
Two British cartoons from 1919/1920.
Source Analysis
Work in pairs. One of you work with Source 4A and the other work
with Source 4B.
1  What is the message of your cartoon? Make sure that you explain
what details in the cartoon help to get this message across.
2  Is your cartoon optimistic or pessimistic about the League of
Nations? Give reasons.
3  Compare your ideas with your partner’s, then write a paragraph
comparing the two cartoons.
FOCUS TASK 2.1
How successful was the League of Nations in the 1920s? (1)
Your prediction
You may already have formed an opinion on the League of Nations
– but if you haven’t, even better! Make your prediction as to how
successful you think the League will be in the 1920s. For example,
how successful do you think it will be in settling the problems left
over from the First World War?
To record your prediction, make your own larger copy of this
diagram, but with one difference. Redraw the segments to show
how successful you think it is going to be.
Keep your diagram somewhere you can refer to it again as you will
be asked to check back a number of times to reconsider your
prediction.
A body blow to the League
Think!
Study Figure 5. Write a ten-word slogan summarising each reason
for opposing the USA’s membership of the League.
Back in the USA Woodrow Wilson had problems. Before the USA could
even join the League, let alone take a leading role, he needed the approval of
his Congress (the American ‘Parliament’). And in the USA the idea of a
League was not at all popu lar, as you can see from Figure 5.
FIGURE 5
Reasons for opposition to the League in the
USA.
SOURCE 6
An American cartoon reprinted in the British
newspaper the Star, June 1919. The original
caption said: ‘JOHN BULL: “Your bridge,
Jonathan. We shan’t quarrel about this.”
[Some of President Wilson’s political
opponents in the U.S.A. are trying to decry
his League of Nations, by representing that it
is a British scheme to exploit the U.S.A.]’
Source Analysis
1  What is the message of the cartoon in Source 6?
2  Explain how the bridge in the cartoon might have been seen by
    a)  supporters
    b)  opponents of the League.
Together, the critics of Wilson’s plans (see Figure 5) put up pow erful
oppos ition to the League. They were joined by Wilson’s many other political
oppon ents. Wilson’s Democratic Party had run the USA for eight troubled
years. Its oppon ents saw the League as an ideal oppor tunity to defeat him.
Wilson toured the USA to put his arguments to the people, but when Congress
voted in 1919 h e was defeated. So, when the League opened for business in
January 1920, t he American chair was empty.
SOURCE 7

A British cartoon from December 1919. The
figure in the white top hat represents the
USA.
Source Analysis
Source 7 is one of the most famous cartoons about the League of
Nations. On your own copy of the cartoon add annotations to explain
the key features. Then write your own summary of the message of
the cartoonist.
Wilson defeated
In 1920 W ilson became seriously ill after a stroke. Despite that, he continued
to press for the USA to join the League. He took the propos al back to
Congress again in March 1920, bu t they defeated it by 49 vot es to 35.
Still the DEMOCRATS did not give up. They were convinced that if the USA
did not get involved in international affairs, another world war might follow.
In the 1920 e lection Wilson could not run for president – he was too ill – bu t
his successor made membership of the League a major part of the Democrat
campaign.
Think!
Look back to your prediction from Focus Task 2.1 on page 31. Do
you want to change your prediction in light of the fact that the USA
has not joined the League?
The REPUBLICAN candidate, Warren Harding, on the other hand, campaigned
for America to be ISOLATIONIST (i.e. not to get involved in international
alliances but follow its own policies and self-interest). His slogan was to
‘return to NORMALCY’, by which he meant life as it was before the war, with
the USA isolating itself from European affairs. Harding and the Republicans
won a landslide victory.
The USA never joined the League. This was a personal rebuff for Wilson and
the Democrats, but it was also a body  blow to the League.
Revision Tip
Be sure you can remember:
•  at least two reasons why some Americans were opposed to the
USA joining the League (see Figure 5)
•  what isolationism means and how it affected the USA’s decision.
The aims of the League
A Covenant set out the aims of the League of Nations. These were:
•  to discourage aggression from any nation
•  to encourage countries to co-operate, especially in business and trade
•  to encourage nations to disarm
•  to improve the living and working conditions of people in all parts of the
world.
Factfile
The League of Nations
•  The League’s home was in Geneva in Switzerland.
•  Despite it being the brainchild of the US president, the USA was
never a member of the League.
•  The most influential part of the League was the COUNCIL – a small
group representing the most powerful members. But it was a
vast organisation with lots of different parts to fulfil different
functions (see chart on pages 36–37).
•  The League did not have its own army. But it could call on the
armies of its members if necessary.
•  One of the jobs of the League was to uphold and enforce the
Treaty of Versailles. This included running some of the territories
(MANDATES) that had belonged to the defeated countries.
•  Forty-two countries joined the League at the start. By the 1930s
it had 59 members.
Article 10 = collective security
The Covenant set out 26 A rticles or rules, which all members of the League
agreed to follow. Probably the most important Article was ARTICLE 10. It
said:
‘The members of the League  unde rtake to preserve agai nst external
aggression the territory and e xisting independence of all members
of the League . In case of threat of dange r the Counc il [of the
League ] shall advise upon t he means by which this obligation shall
be fulfilled.’
Article 10 really meant COLLECTIVE SECURITY. By acting together
(collectively), the members of the League could prevent war by defending the
lands and interests of all nations, large or small.
SOURCE 8

The famous Spanish artist José Maria Sert
was asked to decorate the walls and ceilings
of the Assembly Chamber in the League’s
Headquarters in Geneva, Switzerland. His
murals were designed to show the aims and
values of the League.
Think!
The League had four main aims:
•  discourage aggression
•  encourage CO-OPERATION
•  encourage DISARMAMENT
•  improve living conditions.
As you work through the chapter note down examples that you
think could be used as
•  evidence of success
•  evidence of failure
in each of the aims.
You could record your evidence in a table.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember:
•  the four aims of the League (the initial letters may help you as
they spell out AC/DC)
•  one example of the League succeeding or failing in this aim in the
1920s.
Membership of the League
In the absence of the USA, Britain and France were the most pow erful
countries in the League. Italy and Japan were also permanent members of the
Council, but throughout the 1920s  and 1930s  it was Britain and France who
usually guided pol icy. Any action by the League needed their support.
However, both countries were poor ly placed to take on this role. Both had
been weakened by the First World War. Neither country was quite the major
power it had once been. Neither of them had the resources to fill the gap left
by the USA. Indeed, some British politicians said that if they had foreseen the
American decision, they would not have voted to join the League either. They
felt that the Americans were the only nation with the resources or influence to
make the League work. In particular, they felt that TRADE SANCTIONS would
only work if the Americans applied them.
For the leaders of Britain and France the League posed a real problem. They
had to make it work, yet from the start they doubted how effective it could be.
SOURCE 9
The League of Nations is not set up to deal with a world in chaos,
or with any part of the world which is in chaos. The League of
Nations may give assistance but it is not, and cannot be, a
complete instrument for bringing order out of chaos.
Arthur Balfour, chief British representative at
the League of Nations, speaking in 1920.
Both countries had other priorities.
•  British politicians, for example, were more interested in rebuilding British
trade and looking after the British empire than in being an international
police force.
•  France’s main concern was still Germany. It was worried that without an
army of its own the League was too w eak to protect France from its
powerful neighbour. It did not think Britain was likely to send an army to
help it. This made France quite prepared to bypass the League if necessary
in order to strengthen its position against Germany.
FIGURE 10
Membership of the League of Nations. This
chart shows only the most powerful nations.
More than 50 other countries were also
members.
Think!
1  List the strengths and weaknesses of Britain and France as
leaders of the League of Nations.
2  France proposed that the League should have an army of its
own. Why do you think most people opposed this?
3  Think back to Wilson’s ideas for the League. What problems
would be caused by the fact that:
    a)  the USA
    b)  Germany
were not members of the League?
Organisation of the League
The Covenant laid out the League’s structure and the rules for each of the
bodies within it – see the diagram below.
Think!
1  Study the diagram. Which part of the League would deal with the
following problems:
    a)  an outbreak of a new infectious disease
    b)  a border dispute between two countries
    c)  accidents caused by dangerous machinery in factories
    d)  complaints from people in Palestine that the British were not
running the mandated territory properly?
The Secretariat
•  The SECRETARIAT was a sort of civil service serving all the other
bodies within the League.
•  It kept records of League meetings and prepared reports.
•  The Secretariat had a key role in bringing together experts
from across the world on key issues such as health,
disarmament and economic matters.
The Council
•  The Council was a smaller group than the Assembly, which met
more often, usually about five times a year or more often in
case of emergency. It included:
    •  permanent members. In 1920 these were Britain, France,
Italy and Japan.
    •  temporary members. They were elected by the Assembly for
three-year periods.
•  Each of the permanent members of the Council had a veto. This
meant that one permanent member could stop the Council acting
even if all other members agreed.
•  The main aim of the Council was to resolve disputes by
talking. However, if this did not work, the Council could use a
range of powers:
    •  MORAL CONDEMNATION: they could decide which country was
‘the aggressor’, and tell it to stop what it was doing.
    •  Economic and financial sanctions: members of the League
could refuse to trade with the aggressor.
    •  Military force: the armed forces of member countries could
be used against an aggressor.
The Assembly
•  This was the League’s ‘Parliament’.
•  Every country in the League sent a representative to the
ASSEMBLY.
•  The Assembly could recommend action to the Council.
•  It could also vote on admitting new members to the League.
•  The Assembly only met once a year.
•  Decisions made by the Assembly had to be UNANIMOUS – they had
to be agreed by all members of the Assembly.
The Permanent Court of International Justice
•  The Court was based at the Hague in the Netherlands and was
made up of judges from the member countries.
•  This was meant to play a key role in the League’s work by
settling disputes between countries peacefully.
•  If it was asked, the Court would give a decision on a border
dispute between countries.
•  However, the Court had no way of making sure that countries
followed its rulings.
The International Labour Organisation (ILO)
•  The ILO brought together employers, governments and
workers’ representatives.
•  Its aim was to improve the conditions of working people
throughout the world.
•  It collected statistics and information about working conditions
and how to improve them and it tried to persuade member
countries to adopt its suggestions.
The League of Nations Commissions
As well as dealing with disputes between its members, the League
also attempted to tackle other major problems. This was done
through agencies, COMMISSIONS or committees. The panels below
set out the aims of some of these agencies. See page 41 for a
description of some of the actions they took.
The Mandates Commissions
The First World War had led to many former colonies of
Germany and her allies ending up as League of Nations
mandates ruled by Britain and France on behalf of the League.
The Mandates Commission was made up of teams of expert
advisers whose job was to report to the League on how people
in the mandates were being treated. Their aim was to make sure
that Britain and France acted in the interests of the people of
that territory, not its own interests.
The Refugees Committee
At the end of the First World War there were hundreds of
thousands of refugees who had fled from the areas of
conflict. Some were trying to get back to their homes; others
had no homes to go to. The most pressing problems were in
former Russian territories: the Balkans, Greece, Armenia and
Turkey. It was a mammoth task.
The Slavery Commission
This Commission worked to abolish slavery around the world.
It was a particular issue in East Africa but slavery was also a
major concern in many other parts of the world. There were also
many workers who were not technically slaves but were treated
like slaves. The Commission tried to help them too.
The Health Committee
The Health Committee attempted to deal with the problem of
dangerous diseases and to educate people about health and
sanitation. The First World War had brought about rapid
developments in medicine and ideas about public health and
disease prevention. The Health Committee brought experts
together and worked with charities and many other independent
agencies to collect statistics about health issues, to spread the
new ideas and to develop programmes to fight disease.

FOCUS TASK 2.2
Were there weaknesses in the League’s organisation?
Here is a conversation which might have taken place between two
diplomats in 1920.
1  Work in pairs. Choose one statement each and write out the
reasons each diplomat might give for his opinion. In your answer
make sure you refer to:
    •  the membership of the League
    •  what the main bodies within the League can do
    •  how each body will make decisions
    •  how the League will enforce its decisions.
2  Go back to your diagram from page 31 and see if you want to
change your predictions about how successful the League will
be.
Revision Tip
This is quite a complex chart. Your main aim is to be sure you know
the difference between the League’s Council and its Assembly.
The League and border disputes in the
1920s
The treaties signed at the PARIS PEACE CONFERENCE had created new states
and changed the borders of others. Inevitably this led to disputes and it was
the job of  the League to sort out border disputes. From the start there was so
much to do t hat some disputes were handled by the Conference of
Ambassadors. Strictly this was not a body  of the League of Nations. But it
was made up of leading politicians from the main members of the League –
Britain, France and Italy – so it was very closely linked to the League. As
you can see from Figure 11 the 1920s  was a busy time. This map only shows
a small selection of the disputes which involved the League in this period.
Think!
Five of the problems in Figure 11 are highlighted in bold text. As
you read about each one, score the League’s success on a scale
of –5 (a total failure) to +5 (a great success). Make sure you can
give a reason for your score.
FIGURE 11
Some problems dealt with by the League of
Nations or the Conference of Ambassadors in
the 1920s.
Corfu, 1923
One of the boundaries that had to be sorted out after the war was the border
between Greece and Albania. The Conference of Ambassadors was given
this job and it appointed an Italian general called Tellini to supervise it. On
27 A ugust, while surveying the Greek side of the frontier area, Tellini and his
team were ambushed and killed. The Italian leader Mussolini was furious
and blamed the Greek Government for the murder. On 31 A ugust Mussolini
bombarded and then occupied the Greek island of Corfu. Fifteen people were
killed.
SOURCE 12
The League had been designed to deal with just such a dangerous
problem as this. It had acted promptly and fairly and it had
condemned the violence of the Italians. But it had lost the initiative.
The result was that a great power had once again got away with
using force against a small power.
Historians Gibbons and Morican referring to
the Corfu crisis in The League of Nations and
the UNO, 1970.
Greece appealed to the League for help. Fortunately, the Council was already
in session, so the League acted swiftly. Articles 12 a nd 15 of  the League of
Nations were designed for exactly this situation. They said that when League
members were in dispute and there was a danger of war, members could take
their dispute to the Council and get a judgement. By 7 September it had
prepared its judgement. It condemned Mussolini’s actions. It also suggested
that Greece pay compensation, but that this would be held by the League to
be paid to Italy if, and when, Tellini’s killers were found.
SOURCE 13
The settlement of the dispute between Italy and Greece, though not
strictly a League victory, upheld the principles on which it was
based.
From J. and G. Stokes, Europe and the
Modern World, 1973.
Source Analysis
1  Sources 12 and 13 are referring to the same event. How do their
interpretations differ?
2  Could they both be right? Explain your answer.
Mussolini refused to let the matter rest. He insisted that this dispute had to be
settled by the Conference of Ambassadors because, he said, the Council of
the League was not competent to deal with the issue. He even threatened to
leave the League if this did not happen.
Mussolini would probably not have got his way if the British and French had
stood t ogether. Records from the meetings show that the British did not
accept the Italian case and were prepared to send warships to force
Mussolini out of Corfu. However, the French completely disagreed and
backed the Italians, probably because their forces were tied up in the RUHR
at this time (see page 247) and could not tackle a dispute with Italy as well.
The British were not prepared to act without the French and now argued that
Mussolini’s actions did not constitute an act of war.
Think!
‘The main problem in the Corfu crisis was not the League’s
organisation but the attitude of its own members.’ Explain whether
you agree.
In the end Mussolini got his way and the Conference of Ambassadors made
the final ruling on the dispute. The League’s ruling was changed. Instead of
condemning Mussolini the Conference ordered that the Greeks apologise and
pay compensation directly to Italy. On 27 S eptember, Mussolini withdrew
from Corfu, boa sting of his triumph.
There was much anger in the League over the Ambassadors’ actions and
League lawyers challenged the decision. However, the ruling was never
changed. As historian Zara Steiner says, ‘the dispute showed that the weakest
of the great pow ers could get its way when Britain and France agreed to
sacrifice justice for co-operation’.
The Geneva Protocol
The Corfu incident demonstrated how the League of Nations could be
undermined by its own members. Britain and France drew up the Geneva
Protocol in 1924, w hich said that if two members were in dispute they would
have to ask the League to sort out the disagreement and they would have to
accept the Council’s decision. They hoped this would strengthen the League.
But before the plan could be put into effect there was a general election in
Britain. The new Conservative government refused to sign the Protocol,
worried that Britain would be forced to agree to something that was not in its
own interests. So the Protocol, intended to strengthen the League, in fact
weakened it.
Bulgaria, 1925
Two years after Corfu, the League was tested yet again. In October 1925,
Greek troops  invaded Bulgaria after an incident on the border in which some
Greek soldiers were killed. Bulgaria appealed for help. It also sent
instructions to its army (see Source 14).
SOURCE 14
Make only slight resistance. Protect the refugees. Prevent the
spread of panic. Do not expose the troops to unnecessary losses in
view of the fact that the incident has been laid before the Council of
the League of Nations, which is expected to stop the invasion.
A telegram from the Bulgarian Ministry of
War in Sofia to its army commanders, 22
October 1925.
Source Analysis
1  Read Source 14. Why do you think Bulgaria was so optimistic
about the League?
2  Look at Source 15. What impression of the League does this
cartoon give you?
The secretary-general of the League acted quickly and decisively, calling a
meeting of the League Council in Paris. The League demanded bot h sides
stand their forces dow n and Greek forces withdraw from Bulgaria. Britain
and France solidly backed the League’s judgement (and it is worth
remembering they were negotiating the Locarno Treaties at the same time –
see the Factfile on page 42). The League sent observers to assess the
situation and judged in favour of the Bulgarians. Greece had to pay £45,000
in compensation and was threatened with sanctions if it did not follow the
ruling.
The Greeks obeyed, although they did complain that there seemed to be one
rule for the large states (such as Italy) and another for the smaller ones (such
as themselves). Nevertheless the incident was seen as a major success for the
League and many observers seemed to forget the shame of the Corfu incident
as optimism about the effectiveness of the League soared. Few pointed out
that it was not so much the effectiveness of the machinery of League in this
dispute but the fact that the great pow ers were united in their decision.
FOCUS TASK 2.3
Did the weaknesses in the League’s organisation make failure
inevitable? (1)
Can you find evidence to support or challenge each of the following
criticisms of the League’s organisation:
•  that it would be slow to act
•  that members would act in their own interests, not the League’s
•  that without the USA it would be powerless?
Use a table like this to record your answers:
Criticism Evidence for Evidence against
   
   
Focus first on the Bulgarian and Corfu crises. These will be most
useful for your exam. Then look for evidence from the other crises.
Keep your table safe. You will add to it in a later task on page 53.
Once you have completed your table, look at the balance of
evidence. Does this suggest to you that the League could have
succeeded, or not?
SOURCE 15
A cartoon about the Bulgarian crisis in Punch,
11 November 1925. The characters are
based on Tweedledum and Tweedledee, who
were always quarrelling, from the children’s
book Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland.
How did the League of Nations work
for a better world?
The League of Nations had set itself a wider task than simply waiting for
disputes to arise and hoping to solve them. Through its commissions or
committees (see page 37), the League fought pove rty, disease and injustice
all over the world.
SOURCE 16
One of the League of Nations’ projects.
Refugees
It is estimated that in the first few years after the war, about 400,000
prisoners were returned to their homes by the League’s agencies. When war
led to a refugee crisis in Turkey in 1922, h undreds of thousands of people
had to be housed in refugee camps. The League acted quickly to stamp out
cholera, smallpox and dysentery in the camps. However, the Refugees
Committee was constantly short of funds and its work became more difficult
in the 1930s  as the international situation became tenser and the authority of
the League declined.
Think!
1  Study Source 16. What aspects of the League’s work do you
think it shows?
2  Why do you think the founders of the League wanted it to tackle
social problems?
3  The work of the League’s commissions affected hundreds of
millions of people, yet historians write very little about this side
of its work. Why do you think this is?
Working conditions
The International Labour Organisation succeeded in banning poisonous white
lead from paint and in limiting the hours that small children were allowed to
work. It also campaigned strongly for employers to improve working
conditions. It introduced a resolution for a maximum 48-hour week, and an
eight-hour day, but a majority of members refused to adopt it because they
thought it would cost their industries too m uch. The ILO was hampered by
lack of funds and lack of pow er. It could not do m uch more than ‘name and
shame’ countries or organisations that broke its regulations.
Health
As well as collecting statistical information and spreading good pr actice, it
sponsored research into infectious diseases at institutes in Singapore, London
and Denmark. These institutes helped develop va ccines and medicines to
fight deadly diseases such as leprosy and malaria. The Health Committee is
generally regarded as one of the most successful of the League’s
organisations and its work was continued after 1945 i n the form of the World
Health Organisation.
Slavery and forced labour
It helped free 200,000 s laves in British-owned Sierra Leone. It organised
raids against slave owners and traders in Burma. It challenged the use of
forced labour to build the Tanganyika railway in Africa, where the death rate
among the African workers was a staggering 50 pe r cent. League pressure
brought this dow n to 4 pe r cent, which it said was ‘a much more acceptable
figure’.
Revision Tip
Border disputes
Make sure you can:
•  describe one success in the 1920s and explain why it was a
success
•  describe one failure in the 1920s and explain why it was a failure
and as a bonus:
•  describe and explain one partial success or failure.
The commissions
Make sure you can remember two specific examples of work done
by the League’s commissions or committees. Choose the ones that
you think affected the most people.
Other action
Even in the areas where it could not remove social injustice the League kept
careful records of what was going on and provided information on problems
such as drug trafficking, prostitution and slavery. The League blacklisted four
large German, Dutch, French and Swiss companies which were involved in
the illegal drug trade. The League also made recommendations on practical
problems such as marking shipping lanes and produced an international
highway code for road users.
Disarmament
In the 1920s , the League largely failed to bring about disarmament. At the
Washington Conference in 1921 t he USA, Japan, Britain and France agreed
to limit the size of their navies, but that was as far as disarmament ever got.
The failure of disarmament was particularly damaging to the League’s
reputation in Germany. Germany had disarmed. It had been forced to. But no
other countries had disarmed to the same extent. They were not prepared to
give up their own armies and they were certainly not prepared to be the first
to disarm.
Even so, in the late 1920s , the League’s failure over disarmament did not
seem too serious because of a series of international agreements that seemed
to promise a more peaceful world (see Factfile).
Factfile
International agreements of the 1920s
•  1921 Washington Conference: USA, Britain, France and Japan
agreed to limit the size of their navies.
•  1922 Rapallo Treaty: the USSR and Germany re-established
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS.
•  1924 The Dawes Plan: to avert a terrible economic crisis in
Germany, the USA lent money to Germany to help it to pay its
REPARATIONS bill (see this page).
•  1925 Locarno treaties: Germany accepted its western borders
as set out in the Treaty of Versailles. This was greeted with great
enthusiasm, especially in France. It paved the way for Germany
to join the League of Nations.
•  1928 Kellogg–Briand Pact: 65 nations agreed not to use force
to settle disputes. This is also known as the Pact of Paris.
•  1929 Young Plan: reduced Germany’s reparations payments.
SOURCE 17
A Punch cartoon from 1925. The woman on
the billboard represents Germany.
Source Analysis
1  What is Source 17 commenting on?
2  Is the cartoonist praising or criticising someone or something in
Source 17? Explain your answer.
SOURCE 18
There was a tendency for nations to conduct much of their
diplomacy outside the League of Nations and to put their trust in
paper treaties. After the USA assisted Europe financially there
seemed to be more goodwill which statesmen tried to capture in
pacts and treaties. Many of them, however, were of little value.
They represented no more than the hopes of decent men.
Written by historian Jack Watson in 1984.
Economic recovery
Another reason for optimism in 1928 w as that, after the difficult years of the
early 1920s , the economies of the European countries were once again
recovering. The DAWES PLAN of 1924 h ad helped to sort out Germany’s
economic chaos and had also helped to get the economies of Britain and
France moving again (see Figure 19).
Increased trade between countries helped to reduce political tension. That is
why one of the aims of the League had been to encourage trading links
between the countries. When countries trade with one another, they are much
less likely to go to war with each other.
FIGURE 19
How the Dawes plan helped recovery in
Europe.
Internationalism
Although Wilson’s version of the League never happened, the League still
achieved a lot in the 1920s . Perhaps most important of all, the League
became one of the ways in which the world sorted out international disputes
(even if it was not the only way). Historian Zara Steiner has said that ‘the
League was very effective in handling the “small change” of international
diplomacy’. Her implication, of course, is that the League could not deal
with ‘big’ issues, but it was not tested in this way in the 1920s .
Some historians believe that the biggest achievement of the League was the
way it helped develop an ‘internationalist mind-set’ among leaders – it
encouraged them to think in terms of collaborating rather than competing. One
way it did this was simply by existing! Great and small pow ers felt that it
was worth sending their ministers to League meetings throughout the 1920s
and 1930s . This meant they would often talk together when they might not
have done so otherwise. Even when pow erful countries acted on their own
(for example, ove r Corfu) it was often after their ministers had discussed
their plans at League meetings!
FOCUS TASK 2.4
How successful was the League in the 1920s? (2)
It is now time to draw some conclusions to this key question.
Stage 1: Evaluate the League’s successes and failures
1  Create four cards like the ones on the right – one for each of the
League’s aims.
2  On the back of each card summarise your evidence of success
or failure in each aim. You will have plenty of detail to use from
the table you started in the Think! task on page 34.
3  Based on the evidence on your cards, put the aim you think was
achieved to the greatest extent at the top, and that which was
achieved to the least extent at the bottom.
4  Write some paragraphs to explain your order and support your
paragraphs with evidence from your cards.
5  Extension: Suggest one change the League could make to be
more effective in one of its objectives. Explain how the change
would help. You might find your work on Focus Task 2.3 on page
40 useful for this.
Stage 2: Reach an overall judgement
6  Look back to your predictions for the League for the 1920s
(page 31). Has the League performed better or worse than you
predicted? Redraw your pie chart to show the balance of
success and failure in the 1920s.
7  Which of the following statements do you most agree with?
    •  ‘The League of Nations was a great force for peace in the
1920s.’
    •  ‘Events of the 1920s showed just how weak the League really
was.’
    •  ‘The League’s successes in the 1920s were small-scale. Its
failures had a higher profile.’
Explain why you have chosen your statement, and why you
rejected the others.
2.2 How successful was the League of
Nations in the 1930s?
Most historians agree that in the 1930s  the League of Nations was a failure.
Figure 1 sums up the three main challenges the League faced in the 1930s  and
how the League dealt with them. It makes quite depressing reading!
However, not all historians agree on how far these failures were the fault of
the League and how far other factors beyond the League’s control were more
important. The biggest of these ‘other factors’ was the economic depression
of the 1930s  so let’s start with that.
FIGURE 1
The challenges faced by the League in the
1930s.
The economic depression
In the late 1920s  international trade prospered. The USA, the world’s
richest nation, was a market for other countries to export to. It also helped
economic recovery with loans to many countries, particularly Germany.
In 1929  disaster struck. The WALL STREET CRASH in the USA started a long
depression that quickly caused economic problems throughout the rest of the
world (see Figure 2).
In the 1930s , as a result of the Depression, much of the goodw ill of the late
1920s  evaporated.
•  As US loans dried up, bu sinesses in many countries went bankrupt, leading
to unemployment.
•  Some countries tried to protect their own industries by putting TARIFFS on
imports. But this just meant their trading partners did the same thing and
trade got even worse.
•  Many countries (including Germany, Japan, Italy and Britain) started to
rearm (build up their armed forces) as a way of trying to get industries
working and giving jobs to the unemployed. But these new armies caused
alarm and tension.
The internationalist spirit of the 1920s  was replaced by a more nationalist
‘beggar my neighbour’ approach in the 1930s .
Revision Tip
•  The key idea to grasp from Figure 2 is that the Depression
created economic problems which led to political problems later
on.
•  The two most important examples are Germany and Japan so
make sure you can describe how the Depression affected them.
FIGURE 2
The USA
One way that the League of Nations could stop one country
invading another was to use economic sanctions. But the
Depression made the USA unwilling to help in this because
economic sanctions would make its own economy even worse.
Japan
The Depression threatened to bankrupt Japan. Its main export
was silk to the USA, but the USA was buying less silk. So Japan
had less money to buy food and raw materials. Its leaders were
all army generals. They decided to build an empire by taking over
weaker countries that had the raw materials Japan needed. They
started by invading Manchuria (part of China) in 1931.
Germany
The Depression hit Germany badly. There was unemployment,
poverty and chaos. Germany’s weak leaders seemed unable to
do anything. As a result, Germans elected Adolf Hitler to lead
them. He was not good news for international peace. He openly
planned to invade Germany’s neighbours and to win back land that
Germany had lost in the Great War.
Britain
Britain was one of the leaders of the League of Nations. But, like
the USA, it was unwilling to help sort out international disputes
while its economy was bad. For example, when Japan invaded
Manchuria it did nothing - it did not support economic sanctions
against Japan and did not send troops to protect Manchuria.
Italy
In Italy economic problems encouraged Mussolini to try to build an
overseas empire to distract people’s attention from the difficulties
the government faced.
The impact of the Depression on different
countries.
FOCUS TASK 2.5
How far did the Depression make the work of the League
harder?
Study these statements:
a)  ‘I have not worked since last year.’
b)  ‘I will support anyone who can get the country back to work.’
c)  ‘If we had our own empire we would have the resources we
need. Economic depression would not damage us so much.’
d)  ‘Reparations have caused this mess.’
e)  ‘The bank has closed. We’ve lost everything!’
f)  ‘We need tough leaders who will not be pushed around by the
League of Nations or the USA.’
g)  ‘We should tax all foreign goods. That will protect the jobs of
our workers.’
1  Suggest in which of the following countries (USA, Britain,
France, Germany, Japan or Italy) someone might have said
each of the above statements during the Depression. Some
might apply to more than one country.
2  Suggest why each viewpoint would worry the League of Nations
or make its work harder.
How did the Manchurian crisis weaken
the League?
FIGURE 3
The railways and natural resources of
Manchuria.
Background
Since 1900 J apan’s economy and popu lation had been growing rapidly. By
the 1920s  Japan was a major pow er with a pow erful military, strong
industries and a growing empire (see Figure 3). But the Depression hit Japan
badly as China and the USA put up tariffs (trade barriers) against Japanese
goods . Army leaders in Japan were in no dou bt about the solution to Japan’s
problems – Japan would not face these problems if it had an empire to
provide resources and markets for Japanese goods .
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain:
•  what the League decided should happen in Manchuria
•  why it was unable to force Japan to obey.
The first major test for the League came when the Japanese
invaded Manchuria in 1931.
Invasion 1, 1931
In 1931 a n incident in Manchuria gave them an ideal oppor tunity. The
Japanese army controlled the South Manchurian Railway (see Figure 3).
When Chinese troops  allegedly attacked the railway the Japanese armed
forces used this as an excuse to invade and set up a government in
Manchukuo (Manchuria), which they controlled. Japan’s civilian government
protested but the military were now in charge.
China appeals
China appealed to the League. The Japanese argued that China was in such a
state of anarchy that they had to invade in self-defence to keep peace in the
area. For the League of Nations this was a serious test. Japan was a leading
member of the League. It needed careful handling. What should the League
do?
The League investigates
There was now a long and frustrating delay. The League’s officials sailed
round the world to assess the situation in Manchuria for themselves. This
was well before the days of instant communication by satellite. There was
not even reliable air travel. It was September 1932 – a  full year after the
invasion – be fore they presented their report. It was detailed and balanced,
but the judgement was very clear. Japan had acted unlawfully. Manchuria
should be returned to the Chinese.
Invasion 2, 1933
However, in February 1933, i nstead of withdrawing from Manchuria the
Japanese announced that they intended to invade more of China. They still
argued that this was necessary in self-defence. On 24 F ebruary 1933 t he
report from the League’s officials was approved by 42 vot es to 1 in the
Assembly. Only Japan voted against. Smarting at the insult, Japan resigned
from the League on 27 M arch 1933. The next week it invaded Jehol (see
Figure 3).
SOURCE 4
I was sad to find everyone [at the League] so dejected. The
Assembly was a dead thing. The Council was without confidence in
itself. Beneš [the Czechoslovak leader], who is not given to
hysterics, said [about the people at the League] ‘They are too
frightened. I tell them we are not going to have war now; we have
five years before us, perhaps six. We must make the most of
them.’
The British elder statesman Sir Austen
Chamberlain visited the League of Nations
late in 1932 in the middle of the Manchurian
crisis. This is an adapted extract from his
letters.
Source Analysis
1  Source 5 is a comment on this Manchurian crisis. On your own
copy of this cartoon add annotations to explain:
    a)  the key features
    b)  the message
    c)  what the cartoonist thinks of the League.
2  Read Source 4. Does Beneš share the same view of the League
as the cartoonist in Source 5?
The League responds
The League was pow erless. It discussed economic sanctions, but without the
USA, Japan’s main trading partner, they would be meaningless. Besides,
Britain seemed more interested in keeping up a good r elationship with Japan
than in agreeing to sanctions. The League also discussed banning arms sales
to Japan, but the member countries could not even agree about that. They
were worried that Japan would retaliate and the war would escalate.
There was no prospect at all of Britain and France risking their navies or
armies in a war with Japan. Only the USA and the USSR would have had the
resources to remove the Japanese from Manchuria by force and they were not
even members of the League.
Consequences
All sorts of excuses were offered for the failure of the League: Japan was so
far away; Japan was a special case; Japan did have a point when it said that
China was itself in the grip of anarchy. However, the significance of the
MANCHURIAN CRISIS was obvi ous. As many of its critics had predicted, the
League was pow erless if a strong nation decided to pursue an aggressive
policy and invade its neighbours. Japan had committed blatant aggression
and got away with it. Back in Europe, both Hitler and Mussolini looked on
with interest. Within three years they would bot h follow Japan’s example.
SOURCE 5
A cartoon by David Low, published in a British
newspaper in 1933 (see also Source 8 on
page 49 for more information about the
cartoonist).
Think!
1  Why did it take so long for the League to make a decision over
Manchuria?
2  Did the League fail in this incident because of the way it worked
or because of the attitude of its members?
Why did disarmament fail in the
1930s?
The next big failure of the League of Nations was over disarmament. As you
saw on page 42, the League had not had success in this area in the 1920s
either, but at that stage, when the international climate was better, it had not
seemed to matter so much. In the 1930s , however, there was increased
pressure for the League to do s omething about disarmament. The Germans
had long been angry that they had been forced to disarm after the First World
War while other nations had not done the same. Many countries were actually
spending more on armaments than before the First World War.
SOURCE 6
To make myself perfectly clear, I would ask: is there anyone within
or without Germany who honestly considers the present German
regime to be peaceful in its instincts … Germany is inhibited from
disturbing the peace of Europe solely by its consciousness of its
present military inferiority.
Professor William Rappard speaking to the
League in 1932.
Disarmament Conference
After the Manchurian crisis, members of the League realised the urgency of
the problem. In February 1932 t he long-promised Disarmament Conference
finally got under way. By July 1932 i t had produced resolutions to prohibit
bombing of civilian popu lations, limit the size of artillery, limit the tonnage
of tanks, and prohibit chemical warfare. But there was very little in the
resolutions to show how these limits would be achieved. For example, the
bombing of civilians was to be prohibited, bu t all attempts to agree to
abolish planes capable of bom bing were defeated. Even the propos al to ban
the manufacture of CHEMICAL WEAPONS was defeated.
German disarmament
It was not a promising start. However, there was a bigger problem facing the
Conference – what to do a bout Germany. The Germans had been in the
League for six years. Most people now accepted that they should be treated
more equally than under the Treaty of Versailles. The big question was
whether everyone else should disarm to the level that Germany had been
forced to, or whether the Germans should be allowed to rearm to a level
closer to that of the other pow ers. The experience of the 1920s  showed that
the first option was a non-starter. But there was great reluctance in the
League to allow the second opt ion. The timeline shows how events relating
to Germany moved ove r the next 18 m onths.
July 1932: Germany proposed all countries disarm to its level.
When the Conference failed to agree this principle of ‘equality’, the
Germans walked out.
September 1932: The British sent the Germans a note that went
some way to agreeing equality, but the superior tone of the note
angered the Germans still further.
December 1932: An agreement was finally reached to treat
Germany equally.
January 1933: Germany announced it was coming back to the
Conference.
February 1933: Hitler became CHANCELLOR of Germany at the end
of January. He immediately started to rearm Germany, although
secretly.
May 1933: Hitler promised not to rearm Germany if ‘in five years all
other nations destroyed their arms’.
June 1933: Britain produced an ambitious disarmament plan, but it
failed to achieve support at the Conference.
October 1933: Hitler withdrew from the Disarmament Conference,
and soon after took Germany out of the League altogether.
SOURCE 7

A German cartoon from July 1933. The
parrot represents France. It is calling for
more security.
Source Analysis
1  What is the message of Source 7?
2  Why might this cartoon have been published in Germany in July
1933?
By this stage, all the pow ers knew that Hitler was secretly rearming Germany
already. They also began to rebuild their own armaments. Against that
background the Disarmament Conference struggled on for another year but in
an atmosphere of increasing futility. It finally ended in 1934.
SOURCE 8
David Low’s cartoon commenting on the
failure of the Disarmament Conference in
1934. Low was one of the most famous
cartoonists of the 1930s. He regularly
criticised both the actions of dictators around
the world and the ineffectiveness of the
League of Nations.
Source Analysis
Look at Source 8. Explain what the cartoonist is saying about:
a)  ordinary people
b)  political leaders.
Reasons for failure
The Conference failed for a number of reasons. Some say it was all doom ed
from the start. No one was very serious about disarmament anyway. But there
were other factors at work.
It did not help that Britain and France were divided on this issue. By 1933
many British people felt that the Treaty of Versailles was unfair. In fact, to the
dismay of the French, the British signed an agreement with Germany in 1935
that allowed Germany to build up its navy as long as it stayed under 35 pe r
cent of the size of the British navy. Britain did not consult either its allies or
the League about this, even though this violated the Treaty of Versailles.
It seemed that each country was looking after itself and ignoring the League.
Revision Tip
Although disarmament was a key aim of the League it never really
had much success in this in either the 1920s or the 1930s. The key
thing to remember is why this was more serious in the 1930s than
in the 1920s. In the 1930s it was serious because Germany used
the failure as an excuse for its rapid and risky rearmament
programme.
Think!
1  In what ways were each of the following to blame for the failure
of the Disarmament Conference:
    a)  Germany
    b)  Britain
    c)  the League itself?
2  Do you think the disarmament failure did less or more damage to
the League’s reputation than the Manchurian crisis? Give
reasons.
How did Mussolini’s invasion of
Abyssinia damage the League?
The fatal blow to the League came when the Italian DICTATOR Mussolini
invaded Abyssinia in 1935. There were both similarities with and
differences from the Japanese invasion of Manchuria.
•  Like Japan, Italy was a leading member of the League. Like Japan, Italy
wanted to expand its empire by invading another country.
•  However, unlike Manchuria, this dispute was on the League’s door step.
Italy was a European pow er. It even had a border with France. Abyssinia
bordered on the Anglo-Egyptian territory of Sudan and the British colonies
of Uganda, Kenya and British Somaliland. Unlike events in Manchuria, the
League could not claim that this problem was in an inaccessible part of the
world.
Some argued that Manchuria had been a special case. Would the League do
any better in this ABYSSINIAN CRISIS?
FIGURE 9
British, French and Italian possessions in
eastern Africa.
Background
The origins of this crisis lay back in the previous century. In 1896 I talian
troops  had tried to invade Abyssinia but had been defeated by a poor ly
equipped army of tribesmen. Mussolini wanted revenge for this humiliating
defeat. He also had his eye on the fertile land and mineral wealth of
Abyssinia. However, most importantly, he wanted glory and conquest. His
style of leadership needed military victories and he had often talked of
restoring the glory of the Roman Empire.
In December 1934 t here was a dispute between Italian and Abyssinian
soldiers at the Wal-Wal oasis – 80 k m inside Abyssinia. Mussolini took this
as his cue and claimed this was actually Italian territory. He demanded an
apology and began preparing the Italian army for an invasion of Abyssinia.
The Abyssinian emperor Haile Selassie appealed to the League for help.
Think!
To help you analyse these events draw a timeline, from December
1934 to May 1936, down the middle of a piece of paper and use
the text to mark the key events on it. On one side put the actions of
Mussolini or Hitler, on the other side the actions of Britain, France
and the League.
Phase 1: the League plays for time
From January 1935 t o October 1935, M ussolini was suppos edly negotiating
with the League to settle the dispute. However, at the same time he was
shipping his vast army to Africa and whipping up war fever among the Italian
people.
To start with, the British and the French failed to take the situation seriously.
They played for time. They were desperate to keep good r elations with
Mussolini, who seemed to be their strongest ally against Hitler. They signed
an agreement with him early in 1935 k nown as the Stresa Pact, which was a
formal statement against German REARMAMENT and a commitment to stand
united against Germany. At the meeting to discuss this, they did not even raise
the question of Abyssinia. Some historians suggest that Mussolini believed
that Britain and France had promised to turn a blind eye to his exploits in
Abyssinia in return for his joining them in the Stresa Pact.
However, as the year wore on, there was a public outcry against Italy’s
behaviour. A ballot was taken by the League of Nations Union in Britain in
1934–35. It showed that a majority of British people supported the use of
MILITARY FORCE to defend Abyssinia if necessary. Facing an autumn election
at home, British politicians now began to ‘get tough’. At an assembly of the
League, the British foreign minister, Hoare, made a grand speech about the
value of collective security, to the delight of the League’s members and all
the smaller nations. There was much talking and negotiating. However, the
League never actually did anything to discourage Mussolini.
On 4 September, after eight months’ deliberation, a committee reported to the
League that neither side could be held responsible for the Wal-Wal incident.
The League put forward a plan that would give Mussolini some of Abyssinia.
Mussolini rejected it.
Phase 2: sanctions or not?
In October 1935 M ussolini’s army was ready. He launched a full-scale
invasion of Abyssinia. Despite brave resistance, the Abyssinians were no
match for the modern Italian army equipped with tanks, aeroplanes and
poison gas.
This was a clear-cut case of a large, pow erful state attacking a smaller one.
The League was designed for just such disputes and, unlike in the
Manchurian crisis, it was ideally placed to act. There was no dou bting the
seriousness of the issue either.
The Covenant (see page 34) made it clear that sanctions must be introduced
against the aggressor. A committee was immediately set up to agree what
sanctions to impose. Sanctions would only work if they were imposed
quickly and decisively. Each week a decision was delayed would allow
Mussolini to build up his stockpile of raw materials.
The League banned arms sales to Italy; banned loans to Italy; banned imports
from Italy. It also banned the export to Italy of rubber, tin and metals.
However, the League delayed a decision for two months over whether to ban
oil exports to Italy. It feared the Americans would not support the sanctions.
It also feared that its members’ economic interests would be further
damaged. In Britain, the Cabinet was informed that 30,000 B ritish coal
miners were about to lose their jobs because of the ban on coal exports to
Italy.
More important still, the Suez Canal, which was owned by Britain and
France, was not closed to Mussolini’s supply ships. The canal was the
Italians’ main supply route to Abyssinia and closing it could have ended the
Abyssinian campaign very quickly. Both Britain and France were afraid that
closing the canal could have resulted in war with Italy. This failure was fatal
for Abyssinia.
SOURCE 10
A cartoon from Punch, 1935, commenting on
the Abyssinian crisis. Punch was usually very
patriotic towards Britain. It seldom criticised
British politicians over foreign policy.
Source Analysis
1  Study Source 10. At what point in the crisis do you think this might
have been published? Use the details in the source and the text to
help you decide.
2  Here are three possible reasons why this cartoon was drawn:
    •  To inform people in Britain about British and French policy
    •  To criticise British and French policy
    •  To change British and French policy.
Which do you think is the best explanation?
The Hoare–Laval Pact
Equally damaging to the League was the secret dealing between the British
and the French that was going on behind the scenes. In December 1935,
while sanctions discussions were still taking place, the British and French
foreign ministers, Hoare and Laval, were hatching a plan. This aimed to give
Mussolini two-thirds of Abyssinia in return for his calling off his invasion!
Laval even propos ed to put the plan to Mussolini before they showed it to
either the League of Nations or Haile Selassie. Laval told the British that if
they did not agree to the plan, then the French would no longer support
sanctions against Italy.
However, details of the plan were leaked to the French press. It proved quite
disastrous for the League. Haile Selassie demanded an immediate League
debate about it. In both Britain and France it was seen as a blatant act of
treachery against the League. Hoare and Laval were both sacked. But the real
damage was to the sanctions discussions. They lost all momentum.
Think!
1  How did:
    a)  the USA
    b)  Britain
undermine the League’s attempts to impose sanctions on Italy?
2  Explain in your own words:
    a)  why the Hoare–Laval deal caused such outrage
    b)  how it affected attitudes to the League
    c)  how the USA undermined the League.
No oil sanctions
The question about whether to ban oil sales was further delayed. In February
1936 t he committee concluded that if they did stop oi l sales to Italy, the
Italians’ supplies would be exhausted in two months, even if the Americans
kept on selling oil to them. But by then it was all too late. Mussolini had
already taken over large parts of Abyssinia. And the Americans were even
more disgusted with the ditherings of the French and the British than they had
been before and so blocked a move to support the League’s sanctions.
American oil producers actually stepped up their exports to Italy.
The outcomes
On 7 March 1936 t he fatal blow was delivered. Hitler, timing his move to
perfection, marched his troops  into the RHINELAND, an act prohibited by the
Treaty of Versailles (see page 12). If there had been any hope of getting the
French to support sanctions against Italy, it was now dead. The French were
desperate to gain the support of Italy and were now prepared to pay the price
of giving Abyssinia to Mussolini.
Italy continued to defy the League’s orders and by May 1936 h ad taken the
capital of Abyssinia, Addis Ababa. On 2 May, Haile Selassie was forced
into exile. On 9 May, Mussolini formally annexed the entire country.
The League watched helplessly. Collective security had been shown up as an
empty promise. The League of Nations had failed. If the British and French
had hoped that their handling of the Abyssinian crisis would help strengthen
their position against Hitler, they were soon proved very wrong. In
November 1936 M ussolini and Hitler signed an agreement of their own
called the Rome–Berlin Axis.
SOURCE 11
A German cartoon from the front cover of the
pro-Nazi magazine Simplicissimus, 1936.
The warrior is delivering a message to the
League of Nations (the ‘Völkerbund’): ‘I am
sorry to disturb your sleep but I just wanted
to tell you that you should no longer bother
yourselves about this Abyssinian business.
The matter has been settled elsewhere.’
SOURCE 12
Could the League survive the failure of sanctions to rescue
Abyssinia? Could it ever impose sanctions again? Probably there
had never been such a clear-cut case for sanctions. If the League
had failed in this case there could probably be no confidence that it
could succeed again in the future.
Anthony Eden, British foreign minister,
expressing his feelings about the crisis to the
British Cabinet in May 1936.
Source Analysis
1  Look at Source 11. What event is the cartoonist referring to when
the warrior says ‘the matter has been settled elsewhere’?
2  Compare Sources 11 and 12. How far do they agree about the
implications of the Abyssinian crisis?
A disaster for the League and for the world
Historians often disagree about how to interpret important events. However,
one of the most striking things about the events of 1935 a nd 1936 i s that most
historians seem to agree about the Abyssinian crisis: it was a disaster for the
League of Nations and had serious consequences for world peace.
SOURCE 13
A cartoon from Punch, 1938. The doctors
represent Britain and France.
SOURCE 14
The implications of the conquest of Abyssinia were not confined to
East Africa. Although victory cemented Mussolini’s personal
prestige at home, Italy gained little or nothing from it in material
terms. The damage done, meanwhile, to the prestige of Britain,
France and the League of Nations was irreversible. The only
winner in the whole sorry episode was Adolf Hitler.
Written by historian T.A. Morris in 1995.
SOURCE 15
After seeing what happened first in Manchuria and then in
Abyssinia, most people drew the conclusion that it was no longer
much use placing their hopes in the League…
Written by historian James Joll in 1976.
SOURCE 16
The real death of the League was in 1935. One day it was a
powerful body imposing sanctions, the next day it was an empty
sham, everyone scuttling from it as quickly as possible. Hitler
watched.
Written by historian A.J.P. Taylor in 1966.
SOURCE 17
Yes, we know that World War began in Manchuria fifteen years
ago. We know that four years later we could easily have stopped
Mussolini if we had taken the sanctions against Mussolini that were
obviously required, if we had closed the Suez Canal to the
aggressor and stopped his oil.
British statesman Philip Noel Baker speaking
at the very last session of the League in April
1946.
Think!
Write a caption for the cartoon in Source 13, showing people’s
feelings about the League after the Abyssinian crisis. The real
caption is on page vi.
FOCUS TASK 2.6
How far did weaknesses in the League’s organisation make
failure inevitable? (2)
1  When the League was set up, its critics said there were
weaknesses in its organisation that would make it ineffective. On
page 40 you drew up a table to analyse the effect of these
weaknesses in the 1920s. Now do a similar analysis for the
1930s.
What evidence is there in the Manchurian crisis, the
disarmament talks and the Abyssinian crisis of the following
criticisms of the League:
    •  that it would be slow to act
    •  that members would act in their own interests
    •  that without the USA it would be powerless?
2  ‘The way the League was set up meant it was bound to fail.’
Explain how far you agree with this statement. Support your
answer with evidence from the tables you have compiled for this
Focus Task and Focus Task 2.3 on page 40.
FOCUS TASK 2.7
Why did the League of Nations fail in the 1930s?
Here is a diagram summarising reasons for the failure of the
League of Nations in the 1930s. Complete your own copy of the
diagram to explain how each weakness affected the League’s
actions in Manchuria and Abyssinia. We have filled in some points
for you. There is one weakness that you will not be able to write
about – you will find out about it in Chapter 3.

Revision Tip
The memory aid FAILURE should help you remember these key
points for an exam.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Abyssinian crisis
•  Article 10
•  Assembly
•  Collective security
•  Commissions
•  Conference of Ambassadors
•  Council
•  Covenant
•  Disarmament
•  Economic depression
•  Isolationism
•  Manchurian crisis
•  Military force
•  Moral condemnation
•  Normalcy
•  Secretariat
•  Tariffs
•  Trade sanctions
•  Unanimous
•  Wall Street Crash
FOCUS TASK 2.8
To what extent was the League of Nations a success?
The last few pages have been all about failure. But remember
there were successes too. To help you reach a balanced
judgement on this key question, use these steps to review your
work over the whole chapter.
Stage 1: Evaluate the League’s successes and failures in the
1930s
On page 43 you created four cards to summarise the League’s
successes and failures in the 1920s. Now do the same for the
1930s.
1  Create four cards – one for each of the League’s aims.
    •  discourage aggression
    •  encourage disarmament
    •  encourage co-operation
    •  improve living conditions.
On the back of each card summarise evidence of success or
failure in each aim in the 1930s. You may not be able to do them
all.
2  Based on the evidence on your 1930s cards, put the aim you
think was achieved to the greatest extent in the 1930s at the
top, and that which was achieved to the least extent at the
bottom.
3  Write some paragraphs to explain your order and support your
paragraphs with evidence from your cards.
4  If your order is different from the order you had for the 1920s,
write a further paragraph explaining how and why this has
changed.
Stage 2: Consider reasons for success or failure
5  For each aim decide:
    a)  how far you think the League should get credit for its
successes or how far other factors (e.g. the economy; the
Great Powers) deserve more credit.
    b)  how far you think the League should get blamed for its
failures; were they more the result of the League’s actions or
other factors?
Stage 3: Reach a judgement
6  Now it’s judgement time. Taking all the work you have done;
considering the four aims and its relative success and failure in
each one; and taking into account both the 1920s and the
1930s, how does the League score out of 100?
7  Write a short paragraph explaining your mark out of 100.
Chapter Summary
The League of Nations
  1  The League of Nations was set up to solve problems between
countries before they led to war.
  2  Its methods were mainly diplomacy (talking), trade sanctions,
or if necessary using the armies of their members.
  3  It was the big idea of President Wilson, but his own country, the
USA, never joined but returned to its isolationist policy.
  4  The leading members were Britain and France, but they had
their own interests and bypassed the League when it suited
them.
  5  The League’s structure made it slow to take decisions, which
made it less effective in settling international disputes, but it did
have some successes in the 1920s.
  6  The League’s agencies (committees and commissions) were
set up to solve social problems such as post-war refugee
crises, health problems and slavery/forced labour. It had many
successes throughout the 1920s and 1930s.
  7  The League was supposed to encourage disarmament but
failed to get any countries to disarm.
  8  In the 1930s the League’s work was made much harder by the
economic depression, which made countries less willing to co-
operate and helped turn previously democratic countries such
as Germany into DICTATORSHIPS.
  9  In 1931–32 the League condemned the Japanese invasion of
Manchuria and China but was helpless to do anything to stop it.
10  In 1936–37 the League tried to prevent Italy invading Abyssinia
but it could not agree what to do and never even enforced trade
sanctions.
11  From 1936 the League was seen as irrelevant to international
affairs although its agencies continued its humanitarian work.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  Describe the main powers available to the League to sort out
international disputes. [4]
    (b)  Explain why the League of Nations did not impose sanctions
against Italy during the Abyssinian crisis. [6]
    (c)  ‘The League of Nations had failed before the Abyssinian
crisis even started.’ How far do you agree with this
statement? Explain your answer. [10]
2  Study Source 16 on page 41. How useful is this photograph for
finding out about the League of Nations? Explain your answer by
using details of the source and your own knowledge. [7]
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
3 Why had international peace
collapsed by 1939?
FOCUS POINTS
•  What were the long-term consequences of the peace treaties of
1919–23?
•  What were the consequences of the failures of the League in the
1930s?
•  How far was Hitler’s foreign policy to blame for the outbreak of
war in 1939?
•  Was the policy of Appeasement justified?
•  How important was the Nazi–Soviet Pact?
•  Why did Britain and France declare war on Germany in
September 1939?

Opposite is the front page of the Daily Sketch, 1 October
1938. Read it carefully and select one or two phrases which
suggest or prove that:
•  the British people thought Chamberlain was a hero
•  the newspaper approves of Chamberlain
•  people in Britain genuinely feared a war was imminent in 1938
•  Hitler was respected
•  Hitler could be trusted
•  this agreement would bring lasting peace.
The image on the oppos ite page represents the most famous moment of
Appeasement – the policy followed by Britain and France towards Hitler
through the 1930s . The British prime minister has returned from a meeting
with Hitler having agreed to give him parts of Czechoslovakia, in return for
which Hitler promised peace.
If you know the story already then you will know that this agreement proved
totally empty – ‘not worth the paper it was written on’ as they say! Hitler did
not keep his word, and probably never meant to.
But just forget HINDSIGHT for a moment and try to join with the people of
Britain welcoming back a leader who seemed to be doing his best to
preserve a crumbling peace.
You can see from the newspaper there is a genuine desire to believe in the
possibility of peace. Chamberlain had not given up on the possibility of
peace, nor had the British people. They did not think that war was inevitable
– even in 1938. They did all they could to avoid it.
In this chapter your task is to work out why, despite all the efforts of
international leaders, and all the horrors of war, international peace finally
collapsed in 1939.
Here are some of the factors you will consider. They are all relevant and they
are all connected. Your task will be to examine each one, then see the
connections and weigh the importance of these different factors.
‘Hitler’s war’?
Between 1918 a nd 1933 A dolf Hitler rose from being an obscure and
demoralised member of the defeated German army to become the all-
powerful Führer, DICTATOR of Germany, with almost unlimited pow er and an
overwhelming ambition to make Germany great once again. His is an
astonishing story which you can read about in detail in Chapter 9. Here you
will be concentrating on just one intriguing and controversial question: how
far was Hitler responsible for the outbreak of the Second World War?
Hitler’s plans
Hitler was never secretive about his plans for Germany. As early as 1925 h e
had laid out in his book  MEIN KAMPF what he would do i f the Nazis ever
achieved pow er in Germany.
Abolish the Treaty of Versailles!
Like many Germans, Hitler believed that the TREATY OF VERSAILLES was
unjust.
He hated the Treaty and called the German leaders who had signed it ‘The
NOVEMBER CRIMINALS’. The Treaty was a constant reminder to Germans of
their defeat in the First World War and their humiliation by the Allies. Hitler
promised that if he became leader of Germany he would reverse it (see
Source 1).
SOURCE 1
We demand equality of rights for the German people in its dealings
with other nations, and abolition of the Peace Treaties of Versailles
and St Germain.
From Hitler’s Mein Kampf, 1925.
By the time he came to pow er in Germany, some of the terms had already
been changed. For example, Germany had stoppe d making REPARATIONS
payments altogether. However, most points were still in place. The table on
page 59 shows the terms of the Treaty that most angered Hitler.
Expand German territory!
The Treaty of Versailles had taken away territory from Germany. Hitler
wanted to get that territory back. He wanted Germany to unite with Austria.
He wanted German minorities in other countries such as Czechoslovakia to
rejoin Germany. But he also wanted to carve out an empire in eastern Europe
to give extra LEBENSRAUM or ‘living space’ for Germans (see Source 2).
SOURCE 2
We turn our eyes towards the lands of the east … When we speak
of new territory in Europe today, we must principally think of Russia
and the border states subject to her. Destiny itself seems to wish to
point out the way for us here.
Colonisation of the eastern frontiers is of extreme importance. It
will be the duty of Germany’s foreign policy to provide large spaces
for the nourishment and settlement of the growing population of
Germany.
From Hitler’s Mein Kampf.
Defeat communism!
A German empire carved out of the SOVIET UNION would also help Hitler in
one of his other objectives – the defeat of COMMUNISM or BOLSHEVISM. Hitler
was anticommunist. He believed that Bolsheviks had helped to bring about
the defeat of Germany in the First World War. He also believed that the
Bolsheviks wanted to take over Germany (see Source 3).
SOURCE 3
We must not forget that the Bolsheviks are blood-stained. That they
overran a great state [Russia], and in a fury of massacre wiped out
millions of their most intelligent fellow-countrymen … Germany is
the next great objective of Bolshevism. All our strength is needed to
raise up our nation once more and rescue it from the embrace of
the international python … The first essential is the expulsion of the
Marxist poison from the body of our nation.
From Hitler’s Mein Kampf.
ACTIVITY
It is 1933. Write a briefing paper for the British Government on
Hitler’s plans for Germany. Use Sources 1–3 to help you. Conclude
with your own assessment on whether the Government should be
worried about Hitler and his plans. In your conclusion, remember
these facts about the British Government:
•  Britain is a leading member of the League of Nations and is
supposed to uphold the Treaty of Versailles, by force if
necessary.
•  The British Government does not trust the communists and thinks
that a strong Germany could help to stop the communist threat.
Hitler’s actions
This timeline shows how, between 1933 a nd 1939, H itler turned his plans
into actions.
1933
Took Germany out of the League of Nations; began rearming Germany
1934
Tried to take over Austria but was prevented by Mussolini
1935
Held massive REARMAMENT rally in Germany
1936
Reintroduced CONSCRIPTION in Germany; sent German troops  into the
RHINELAND; made an anticommunist ALLIANCE with Japan
1937
Tried out Germany’s new weapons in the SPANISH CIVIL WAR; made an
anticommunist alliance with Italy
1938
Took over Austria; took over the SUDETENLAND area of Czechoslovakia
1939
Invaded the rest of Czechoslovakia; invaded Poland; war
Other factors
When you see events leading up to the war laid out this way, it makes it seem
as if Hitler planned it all step by step. In fact, this view of events was widely
accepted by historians until the 1960s . In the 1960s , however, the British
historian A.J.P. Taylor came up with a new interpretation. His view was that
Hitler was a gambler rather than a planner. Hitler simply took the logical
next step to see what he could get away with. He was bold. He kept his
nerve. As other countries gave in to him and allowed him to get away with
each gamble, so he became bolder and risked more. In Taylor’s
interpretation it is Britain, the Allies and the League of Nations who are to
blame for letting Hitler get away with it – by  not standing up to him. In this
interpretation it is other factors that are as much to blame as Hitler himself:
•  the worldwide ECONOMIC DEPRESSION
•  the weaknesses of the post-war treaties
•  the actions of the leading pow ers – Britain, France, the USA and the USSR.
As you examine Hitler’s actions in more detail, you will see that both
interpretations are possible. You can make up your own mind which you
agree with.
SOURCE 4
Any account of the origins and course of the Second World War
must give Hitler the leading part. Without him a major war in the
early 1940s between all the world’s great powers was unthinkable.
British historian Professor Richard Overy,
writing in 1996.
Revision Tip
The details in this chart will be a very useful revision aid. So add
pictures and highlights to help you learn the information.
Think!
Hitler and the Treaty of Versailles
1  Draw up a table like this one to show some of the terms of the
Treaty of Versailles that affected Germany.
2  As you work through this chapter, fill out the other columns of
this ‘Versailles chart’.
Rearmament
Hitler came to pow er in Germany in 1933. One of his first steps was to
increase Germany’s armed forces. Thousands of unemployed workers were
drafted into the army. This helped him to reduce unemployment, which was
one of the biggest problems he faced in Germany. But it also helped him to
deliver on his promise to make Germany strong again and to challenge the
terms of the Treaty of Versailles.
SOURCE 5
I am convinced that Hitler does not want war … what the Germans
are after is a strong army which will enable them to deal with
Russia.
British politician Lord Lothian, January 1935.
Hitler knew that German people supported rearmament. But he also knew it
would cause alarm in other countries. He handled it cleverly. Rearmament
began in secret at first. He made a great public display of his desire not to
rearm Germany – that he was only doing it because other countries refused to
disarm (see page 48). He then followed Japan’s example and withdrew from
the League of Nations.
In 1935 H itler openly staged a massive military rally celebrating the German
armed forces. In 1936 h e even reintroduced conscription to the army. He was
breaking the terms of the Treaty of Versailles, but he guessed correctly that he
would get away with rearmament. Many other countries were using
rearmament as a way to fight unemployment. The collapse of the League of
Nations Disarmament Conference in 1934 ( see pages 48– 49) had shown that
other nations were not prepared to disarm.
Rearmament was a very popu lar move in Germany. It boos ted Nazi support.
Hitler also knew that Britain had some sympathy with Germany on this issue.
Britain believed that the limits put on Germany’s armed forces by the Treaty
of Versailles were too tight. The permitted forces were not enough to defend
Germany from attack. Britain also thought that a strong Germany would be a
good bu ffer against communism.
Britain had already helped to dismantle the Treaty by signing a naval
agreement with Hitler in 1935, a llowing Germany to increase its navy to up
to 35 pe r cent of the size of the British navy. The French were angry with
Britain about this, but there was little they could do. Through the rest of the
1930s  Hitler ploughed more and more spending into armaments (see Figures
6 and 7).
FIGURE 6
The proportion of German spending that went
into armaments, 1935–40.
FIGURE 7
German armed forces in 1932 and 1939.
Source Analysis
How far do Figures 6 and 7 prove Source 5 to be wrong?
Think!
1  Fill out the first row of your ‘Versailles chart’ on page 59 to
summarise what Hitler did about rearmament.
2  What factors allowed Hitler to get away with rearming
Germany? Look for:
    a)  the impact of the Depression
    b)  the Treaty of Versailles
    c)  the League of Nations
    d)  the actions of Britain and France.
The Saar plebiscite
The SAAR region of Germany had been run by the League of Nations since
1919 ( see page 38).
In 1935 t he League of Nations held the promised plebiscite for people to
vote on whether their region should return to German rule. Hitler was
initially wary as many of his oppon ents had fled to the Saar. The League,
however, was determined that the vote should take place and Hitler bow ed to
this pressure. So it seemed that the League was being firm and decisive with
Hitler. The vote was an overwhelming success for Hitler. His PROPAGANDA
minister Joseph Goebbels mounted a massive campaign to persuade the
people of the Saar to vot e for the Reich. Around 90 pe r cent of the popu lation
voted to return to German rule. This was entirely legal and within the terms
of the Treaty. It was also a real morale boos ter for Hitler. After the vote
Hitler declared that he had ‘no further territorial demands to make of
France’.
SOURCE 8
A photograph showing German forces moving
back into the Saar after the plebiscite in
1935.
Source Analysis
    1  Describe the scene shown in Source 8 as though you were
reporting it on the radio.
2  Who or what do you think might be represented by the figure
being hanged?
3  Do you find this source convincing evidence that the Saar wanted
to rejoin Germany?
SOURCE 9
A British cartoon published in January 1935,
soon after the Saar plebiscite. The figure in
bed is the League of Nations. The caption
was ‘Sitting up and taking nourishment’.
Remilitarisation of the Rhineland
In March 1936, H itler took his first really big risk by moving troops  into the
Rhineland area of Germany. The Rhineland was the large area either side of
the River Rhine that formed Germany’s western border with France and
Belgium.
The demilitarisation of the Rhineland was one of the terms of the Treaty of
Versailles. It was designed to protect France from invasion from Germany. It
had also been accepted by Germany in the Locarno Treaties of 1925. Hitler
was taking a huge gamble with REMILITARISATION. If he had been forced to
withdraw, he would have faced humiliation and would have lost the support
of the German army (many of the generals were unsure about him, anyway).
Hitler knew the risks, but he had chosen the time and place well.
•  F r an c e and the USSR had just signed a treaty to protect each other against
attack from Germany (see Source 11). Hitler used the agreement to claim
that Germany was under threat. He argued that in the face of such a threat
he should be allowed to place troops  on his own frontier.
•  Hitler knew that many people in B r i t ai n felt that he had a right to station
his troops  in the Rhineland and he was fairly confident that Britain would
not intervene. His gamble was over France. Would France let him get
away with it?
FIGURE 10
The Rhineland.
SOURCE 11
An American cartoon entitled ‘Ring-Around-
the-Nazi!’ published in March 1936 showing
the encirclement of Germany by France and
the USSR.
SOURCE 12
German troops marching through the city of
Cologne in March 1936. This style of
marching with high steps was known as
goose-stepping.
As the troops  moved into the Rhineland, Hitler and his generals sweated
nervously. They had orders to pull out if the French acted against them.
Despite the rearmament programme, Germany’s army was no match for the
French army. It lacked essential equipment and air support. In the end,
however, Hitler’s luck held.
Think!
Fill out row 2 of your ‘Versailles chart’ on page 59 to summarise
what happened in the Rhineland.
The attention of the League of Nations was on the Abyssinian crisis which
was happening at exactly the same time (see pages 50– 53). The League
condemned Hitler’s action but had no pow er to do a nything else. Even the
French, who were most directly threatened by the move, were divided ove r
what to do. They were about to hold an election and none of the French
leaders was prepared to take responsibility for plunging France into a war.
Of course, they did not know how weak the German army was. In the end,
France refused to act without British support and so Hitler’s big gamble paid
off. Maybe next time he would risk more!
SOURCE 13
At that time we had no army worth mentioning … If the French had
taken any action we would have been easily defeated; our
resistance would have been over in a few days. And the Air Force
we had then was ridiculous – a few Junkers 52s from Lufthansa
and not even enough bombs for them…
Hitler looks back on his gamble over the
Rhineland some years after the event.
SOURCE 14
Hitler has got away with it. France is not marching. No wonder the
faces of Göring and Blomberg [Nazi leaders] were all smiles.
Oh, the stupidity (or is it the paralysis?) of the French. I learnt
today that the German troops had orders to beat a hasty retreat if
the French army opposed them in any way.
Written by William Shirer in 1936. He was an
American journalist in Germany during the
1930s. He was a critic of the Nazi regime and
had to flee from Germany in 1940.
SOURCE 15
A British cartoon about the reoccupation of
the Rhineland, 1936. Pax Germanica is Latin
and means ‘Peace, German style’.
Source Analysis
1  Does Source 11 prove that Hitler was correct when he argued
that Germany was under threat? Explain your answer.
2  What do Sources 13 and 14 disagree about? Why might they
disagree about it?
3  Why has the cartoonist in Source 15 shown Germany as a
goose?
4  Look at the equipment being carried by the goose. What does
this tell you about how the cartoonist saw the new Germany?
5  Would you regard reoccupation of the Rhineland as a success for
Hitler or as a failure for the French and the British? Explain your
answer by referring to the sources.
The Spanish Civil War
In 1936 a  CIVIL WAR broke out in Spain between supporters of the Republican
Government and RIGHT-WING rebels under General Franco. The war quickly
gained an international dimension.
STALIN’S USSR supported the Republican Government (in the form of
weapons, aircraft and pilots). Thousands of volunteers from around 50
countries joined International Brigades to support the Republicans. At the
same time, Hitler and Mussolini declared their support for General Franco.
He seemed to be a man who shared their world view.
Britain and France refused to intervene directly, although France did provide
some weapons for the Republicans. Germany and Italy also agreed not to
intervene but then blatantly did so. Mussolini sent thousands of Italian troops
(officially they were ‘volunteers’). Germany sent aircraft and pilots who
took part in most of the major campaigns of the war including bom bing raids
on civilian popu lations.
The conflict had important consequences for peace. It strengthened the bonds
between Mussolini and Hitler. It encouraged Hitler to believe that Britain
and France would not intervene against him if he took further actions against
the Treaty of Versailles. Although Britain did not intervene, Hitler’s actions
alarmed Chamberlain and he ordered massive increases in spending on
Britain’s armed forces, especially the Royal Air Force. At the same time, the
USSR became increasingly suspicious of Britain and France because of their
reluctance to get involved in oppos ing fascism.
SOURCE 16
A postcard published in France to mark the
bombing of Guernica in 1937. The text reads
‘The Basque people murdered by German
planes. Guernica martyred 26 April 1937’.
Source Analysis
1  What can we learn from Source 16 about:
    •  what happened at Guernica
    •  the views of French people on Guernica
    •  the views of the magazine which published the photograph and
caption?
2  Use your thinking in Question 1 to write an answer to the
question: How useful is Source 16 to a historian studying the
Spanish Civil War?
Militarism and the Axis
Meanwhile, in the east Japan was under the control of hardline nationalist
commanders such as General Tojo. They also had the support of business
leaders in Japan. They wanted to extend Japan’s empire across Asia so it
could compete with other world pow ers, particularly the USA. In 1937 t he
Japanese took their next big step with the invasion of China. Some historians
regard this as the first campaign of the Second World War.
Hitler and Mussolini saw that they had much in common with the military
DICTATORSHIP in Japan. In 1936, G ermany and Japan signed an ANTI-
COMINTERN PACT, to oppos e communism. Comintern was the USSR’s
organisation for spreading communism to other countries. In 1937, I taly also
signed it. The new alliance was called the Axis alliance.
There was very little Britain or France could do a bout the Axis, but it was
another worrying development, especially as Britain did not have the
resources to fight Japan in the Far East and Germany in Europe.
FOCUS TASK 3.1
What were the consequences of the failure of the League in
the 1930s?
In Chapter 2 you studied the failures of the League of Nations in
the 1930s. You are now in a position to evaluate the impact of
those failures on Hitler’s actions.
1  Look back over pages 60–64. Look for evidence that the
weakness of the League of Nations in the 1930s allowed Hitler
to achieve what he did.
2  Write a paragraph describing the effect of each of the following
on Hitler’s actions:
    •  the Manchurian crisis
    •  the failure of DISARMAMENT
    •  the Abyssinian crisis.
Anschluss with Austria, 1938
With the successes of 1936 a nd 1937 t o boos t him, Hitler turned his attention
to his homeland of Austria. Hitler believed that the two states belonged
together as one German nation. Many in Austria supported the idea of union
with Germany. Hitler had tried to take over Austria in 1934, bu t on that
occasion Mussolini had stoppe d him. But in 1938 t he situation was different.
Hitler and Mussolini were now allies.
Think!
Complete row 3 of your ‘Versailles chart’ on page 59, summarising
what Hitler did about Austria.
There was a strong Nazi Party in Austria. Hitler encouraged them to stir up
trouble for the Government and hold demonstrations demanding union with
Germany. Hitler then told the Austrian Chancellor Schuschnigg that only
ANSCHLUSS (political union) could sort out these problems. Schuschnigg
appealed to Britain and France but it failed to provide any support so
Schuschnigg felt he had no opt ion but to call a plebiscite (a referendum) to
see what the Austrian people wanted. Hitler was not prepared to risk this –
he might lose! He simply sent his troops  into Austria in March 1938,
suppos edly to guarantee a trouble-free plebiscite. Under the watchful eye of
the Nazi troops , 99.75 pe r cent voted for Anschluss.
Anschluss was completed without any military confrontation with France and
Britain. Chamberlain felt that Austrians and Germans had a right to be united
and that the Treaty of Versailles was wrong to separate them.
Once again, Hitler’s risky but decisive action had reaped a rich reward –
Austria’s soldiers, weapons and its rich deposits of gold and iron ore were
added to Germany’s increasingly strong army and industry. Hitler was
breaking yet another condition of the Treaty of Versailles, but it seemed clear
to him that Britain and France were not prepared to go to war to defend it.
However, Britain and France were not naïve either. Chamberlain increased
Britain’s rearmament spending further still and made plans for compulsory
military service and the preparation of air-raid defences.
SOURCE 17
A British cartoon commenting on the
Anschluss.
SOURCE 18
A Soviet cartoon commenting on the
Anschluss showing Hitler catching Austria.
Source Analysis
Work in pairs. Take either Source 17 or Source 18.
1  For your source work out:
    a)  which character in the cartoon represents Mussolini and which
Hitler
    b)  what your cartoon suggests about the relationship between
Hitler and Mussolini
    c)  what is the cartoonist’s opinion of the Anschluss. Find details
in the source to support your view.
2  Compare your answers with your partner’s and discuss any
points of agreement or disagreement.
3  Write your own paragraph in answer to this question: How far do
Sources 17 and 18 agree about the Anschluss?
Appeasement: for and against!
If Britain and France were not prepared to defend the Treaty of Versailles,
would they let Hitler have more of his demands? The short answer is yes,
and Britain’s policy at this time is known as APPEASEMENT. Neville
Chamberlain is the man most associated with this policy (see Profile on page
69) although he did not become prime minister until 1937. Many other British
people (probably the majority), including many politicians, were also in
favour of this policy. However, there were some at the time who were very
critical. Here are the main arguments for and against.

FOCUS TASK 3.2
Why did Britain and France follow a policy of Appeasement?
The cards on page 66 show various arguments that were advanced
for or against Appeasement. Study the cards, then:
1  Sort them into arguments for and arguments against
Appeasement. If there are any you are not sure about leave
them aside as you can come back to them.
2  On each card write a ‘for’ or ‘against’.
3  Sort the cards into those that:
    a)  would have been obvious to British and French leaders at the
time
    b)  would only be clear with hindsight.
4  Make notes under the following headings to summarise why
Britain followed a policy of Appeasement:
    a)  military reasons
    b)  economic reasons
    c)  fear
    d)  public opinion.
5  Use your notes to write a short paragraph to explain in your own
words why the British Government followed a policy of
Appeasement.
Cartoonist David Low
One of the most famous critics was David Low, cartoonist with the popu lar
newspaper the London Evening St andar d. You have seen many of Low’s
cartoons in this book  already. Low was a fierce critic of Hitler, but also
criticised the policy of Appeasement. Source 19 shows one of his cartoons
on the issue, but if you visit the British Cartoon Archive website you will be
able to see all of Low’s cartoons.
ACTIVITY
Most people in Britain supported the policy of Appeasement. Write
a letter to the London Evening Standard justifying Appeasement
and pointing out why the cartoonist in Source 19 is wrong. Your
letter should be written in either 1936 or 1938 and it will need to be
different according to which date you pick. You can use some of the
arguments from Focus Task 3.2 above in your letter.
SOURCE 19
A cartoon by David Low from the London
Evening Standard, 1936. This was a popular
newspaper with a large readership in Britain.
Source Analysis
Fill out a table like this to analyse Source 19. Fill out a second
column to analyse Source 27 on page 70 in the same way.
 Source 19
Date published  
Critical or supportive?  
  
Of what/whom?  
How can we tell?  
Why was the cartoon published at this time?  
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain:
•  what Appeasement was
•  two examples of Appeasement in action.
Be sure you can describe:
•  one reason why Chamberlain followed the policy of
Appeasement
•  one reason why people criticised the policy.
The Sudetenland, 1938
After the Austrian Anschluss, Hitler was beginning to feel that he could not
put a foot wrong. But his growing confidence was putting the peace of
Europe in increasing danger.
FIGURE 20

Central Europe after the Anschluss.
Czech fears
Unlike the leaders of Britain and France, Edvard Beneš, the leader of
Czechoslovakia, was horrified by the Anschluss. He realised that
Czechoslovakia would be the next country on Hitler’s list for take-over. It
seemed that Britain and France were not prepared to stand up to Hitler.
Beneš sought guarantees from the British and French that they would honour
their commitment to defend Czechoslovakia if Hitler invaded. The French
were bound by a treaty and reluctantly said they would. The British felt
bound to support the French. However, Chamberlain asked Hitler whether he
had designs on Czechoslovakia and was reassured by Hitler’s promise
(Source 21).
SOURCE 21
I give you my word of honour that Czechoslovakia has nothing to
fear from the Reich.
Hitler speaking to Chamberlain in 1938.
Hitler’s threats
Despite what he said to Chamberlain, Hitler did have designs on
Czechoslovakia. This new state, created by the Treaty of Versailles, included
a large number of Germans – former subjects of Austria–Hungary’s empire –
in the Sudetenland area. Konrad Henlein, the leader of the Nazis in the
Sudetenland, de manded that the area should be part of Germany. In May
1938, H itler made it clear that he intended to fight Czechoslovakia if
necessary. Historians disagree as to whether Hitler really meant what he
said. There is considerable evidence that the German army was not at all
ready for war. Even so, the news put Europe on full war alert.
Preparations for war
Unlike Austria, Czechoslovakia would be no walk-over for Hitler. Britain,
France and the USSR had all promised to support Czechoslovakia if it came
to war. The Czechs themselves had a modern army. The Czechoslovak
leader, Beneš, was prepared to fight. He knew that without the Sudetenland
and its forts, railways and industries, Czechoslovakia would be defenceless.
All through the summer the tension rose in Europe. If there was a war, people
expected that it would bring heavy bom bing of civilians as had happened in
the Spanish Civil War, and in cities around Britain councils began digging
air-raid shelters. Magazines carried advertisements for air-raid protection
and gas masks.
ACTIVITY
Write a series of newspaper headlines for different stages of the
Sudetenland crisis, for example:
•  March 1938
•  May 1938
•  early September 1938
•  30 September 1938.
Include headlines for:
•  a Czech newspaper
•  a British newspaper
•  a German newspaper.
SOURCE 22
How horrible, fantastic, incredible it is that we should be digging
trenches and trying on gas masks here because of a quarrel in a
far-away country between people of whom we know nothing. I am
myself a man of peace to the depths of my soul.
From a radio broadcast by Neville
Chamberlain, September 1938.
SOURCE 23

Digging air-raid defences in London,
September 1938.
Profile
Neville Chamberlain
•  Born 1869.
•  He was the son of the famous RADICAL politician Joseph
Chamberlain.
•  He was a successful businessman in the Midlands before
entering politics.
•  During the First World War he served in the Cabinet as director
general of National Service. During this time he saw the full
horrors of war.
•  After the war he was health minister and then CHANCELLOR. He
was noted for his careful work and his attention to detail.
However, he was not good at listening to advice.
•  He was part of the government throughout the 1920s and
supported the policy of Appeasement towards Hitler. He became
prime minister in 1937, although he had little experience of
foreign affairs.
•  He believed that Germany had real grievances – this was the
basis for his policy of Appeasement.
•  He became a national hero after the Munich Conference of 1938
averted war.
•  In 1940 Chamberlain resigned as prime minister and Winston
Churchill took over.
Crisis talks
In September the problem reached crisis point. In a last-ditch effort to avert
war, Chamberlain flew to meet Hitler on 15 S eptember. The meeting
appeared to go well. Hitler moderated his demands, saying he was only
interested in parts of the Sudetenland – a nd then only if a plebiscite showed
that the Sudeten Germans wanted to join Germany. Chamberlain thought this
was reasonable. He felt it was yet another of the terms of the Treaty of
Versailles that needed to be addressed. Chamberlain seemed convinced that,
if Hitler got what he wanted, he would at last be satisfied.
On 19 S eptember the French and the British put to the Czechs their plans to
give Hitler the parts of the Sudetenland that he wanted. However, three days
later at a second meeting, Hitler increased his demands. He said he
‘regretted’ that the previously arranged terms were not enough. He wanted
all the Sudetenland.
SOURCE 24
The Sudetenland is the last problem that must be solved and it will
be solved. It is the last territorial claim which I have to make in
Europe.
The aims of our foreign policy are not unlimited … They are
grounded on the determination to save the German people alone
… Ten million Germans found themselves beyond the frontiers of
the Reich … Germans who wished to return to the Reich as their
homeland.
Hitler speaking in Berlin, September 1938.
To justify his demands, he claimed that the Czech Government was
mistreating the Germans in the Sudetenland and that he intended to ‘rescue’
them by 1 October. Chamberlain told Hitler that his demands were
unreasonable. The British navy was MOBILISED. War seemed imminent.
The Munich Agreement
With Mussolini’s help, a final meeting was held in Munich on 29 S eptember.
While Europe held its breath, the leaders of Britain, Germany, France and
Italy decided on the fate of Czechoslovakia.
On 29 S eptember they decided to give Hitler what he wanted. They
announced that Czechoslovakia was to lose the Sudetenland. They did not
consult the Czechs, nor did they consult the USSR. This is known as the
MUNICH AGREEMENT. The following morning Chamberlain and Hitler
published a joint declaration, which Chamberlain said would bring ‘peace
for our time’.
Consequences of the Munich
Agreement
Hitler had gambled that the British would not risk war. The prize of the
Sudetenland had been given to him without a shot being fired. On 1 October
German troops  marched into the Sudetenland. At the same time, Hungary and
Poland helped themselves to Czech territory where Hungarians and Poles
were living.
The Czechs had been betrayed. Beneš resigned and the country descended
into chaos. But the rest of Europe breathed a sigh of relief. Chamberlain
received a hero’s welcome back in Britain, when he returned with the ‘piece
of paper’ – the Agreement – signed by Hitler (see photo in the Profile, page
69).
SOURCE 25
People of Britain, your children are safe. Your husbands and your
sons will not march to war. Peace is a victory for all mankind. If we
must have a victor, let us choose Chamberlain, for the Prime
Minister’s conquests are mighty and enduring – millions of happy
homes and hearts relieved of their burden.
The Daily Express comments on the Munich
Agreement, 30 September 1938.
SOURCE 26
By repeatedly surrendering to force, Chamberlain has encouraged
aggression … our central contention, therefore, is that Mr
Chamberlain’s policy has throughout been based on a fatal
misunderstanding of the psychology of dictatorship.
The Yorkshire Post, December 1938.
SOURCE 27
A British cartoon published in 1938 at the
time of the Munich Agreement. John Bull
represents Britain.
SOURCE 28
We have suffered a total defeat … I think you will find that in a
period of time Czechoslovakia will be engulfed in the Nazi regime.
We have passed an awful milestone in our history. This is only the
beginning of the reckoning.
Winston Churchill speaking in October 1938.
He felt that Britain should resist the demands
of Hitler. However, he was an isolated figure
in the 1930s.
Source Analysis
1  Study Sources 25–28. Sort them into the categories:
    a)  those that support the Munich Agreement
    b)  those that criticise the Munich Agreement.
2  List the reasons why each source supports or criticises the
agreement.
3  Imagine you are a teacher setting a test.
    •  Which of Sources 25–28 would work well for an ‘Are you
surprised?’ question?
    •  Which of Sources 25–28 would work well for a ‘How useful is
this source?’ question?
Explain your answers.
Triumph or sell-out?
What do y ou think of the Munich Agreement? Was it a good m ove or a poor
one? Most people in Britain were relieved that it had averted war, but many
were soon openly questioning the whole policy of Appeasement. Opinion
polls in September 1938 s how that the British people did not think
Appeasement would stop H itler. It simply delayed a war, rather than
preventing it. And while he hoped for peace Chamberlain continued to
increase arms spending in preparation for war.
Think!
Complete row 4 of your ‘Versailles chart’ on page 59.
Czechoslovakia, 1939: the end of
Appeasement
Although the British people welcomed the Munich Agreement, they did not
trust Hitler. In an opinion poll in October 1938, 93 pe r cent said they did not
believe him when he said he had no more territorial ambitions in Europe. In
March 1939 t hey were proved right. On 15 M arch, German troops  took over
the rest of the country.
FIGURE 29
The take-over of Czechoslovakia by 1939.
SOURCE 30
German troops entering Prague, the capital
of Czechoslovakia, in March 1939.
There was no resistance from the Czechs. Nor did Britain and France do
anything about the situation. However, it was now clear that Hitler could not
be trusted. For Chamberlain it was a step too far. Unlike the Sudeten
Germans, the Czechs were not separated from their homeland by the Treaty
of Versailles. This was an invasion. If Hitler continued unchecked, his next
target was likely to be Poland.
Britain and France told Hitler that if he invaded Poland they would declare
war on Germany. The policy of Appeasement was ended. However, after
years of Appeasement, Hitler did not actually believe that Britain and France
would risk war by resisting him.
Think!
1  Choose five words to describe the attitude of the crowd in
Source 30.
2  Why do you think that there was no resistance from the Czechs?
3  Why do you think Britain and France did nothing in response to
the invasion?
The Nazi–Soviet Pact, 1939
Look at your ‘Versailles chart’ from page 59. You should have only one item
left. As Hitler was gradually retaking land lost at Versailles, you can see
from Figure 29 that logically his next target was the strip of former German
land in Poland known as the POLISH CORRIDOR. He had convinced himself
that Britain and France would not risk war over this, but he was less sure
about Stalin and the USSR. Let’s see why.
Stalin’s fears
Stalin had been very worried about the German threat to the Soviet Union
ever since Hitler came to pow er in 1933. Even so, Stalin could not reach any
kind of lasting agreement with Britain and France in the 1930s . In 1934 h e
had made the USSR a member of the League of Nations, hoping the League
would guarantee his security against the threat from Germany. However, all
he saw at the League was its lack of action over Abyssinia and the Spanish
Civil War. Politicians in Britain and France had not resisted German
rearmament in the 1930s . Indeed, some in Britain seemed even to welcome a
stronger Germany as a force to fight communism, which they saw as a bigger
threat to British interests than Hitler.
Stalin’s fears and suspicions grew in the mid-1930s .
•  He signed a treaty with France in 1935 t hat said that France would help the
USSR if Germany invaded the Soviet Union. But Stalin was not sure he
could trust the French to stick to it, particularly when they failed even to
stop H itler moving his troops  into the Rhineland, which was right on their
own border.
•  The Munich Agreement in 1938 i ncreased Stalin’s concerns. He was not
consulted about it. Stalin concluded from the agreement that France and
Britain were pow erless to stop H itler or, even worse, that they were happy
for Hitler to take over eastern Europe and then the USSR.
Stalin’s negotiations
Despite his misgivings, Stalin was still prepared to talk with Britain and
France about an alliance against Hitler. The three countries met in March
1939, bu t Chamberlain was suspicious of the USSR and was reluctant to
commit Britain. From Stalin’s point of view, France and Britain then made
things worse by giving Poland a guarantee that they would defend it if it was
invaded. Chamberlain meant the guarantee as a warning to Hitler. Stalin saw
it as support for one of the USSR’s potential enemies.
Negotiations between Britain, France and the USSR continued through the
spring and summer of 1939. However, Stalin also received visits from the
Nazi foreign minister Ribbentrop. They discussed a very different deal, a
NAZI–SOVIET PACT.
Stalin’s decision
In August, Stalin made his decision. On 23 A ugust 1939, H itler and Stalin,
the two arch enemies, signed the Nazi–Soviet Pact and announced the terms
to the world. They agreed not to attack one another. Privately, they also
agreed to divide Poland between them.
SOURCE 31
A Soviet cartoon from 1939. CCCP is
Russian for USSR. The French and the British
are directing Hitler away from western
Europe and towards the USSR.
SOURCE 32
It will be asked how it was possible that the Soviet government
signed a non-aggression pact with so deceitful a nation, with such
criminals as Hitler and Ribbentrop … We secured peace for our
country for eighteen months, which enabled us to make military
preparations.
Stalin, in a speech in 1941.
Source Analysis
1  What do Sources 31 and 32 agree about?
2  Which source do you most trust to tell you about the reasons
Stalin signed the Pact?
Why did Stalin sign the Pact?
It was clear what Hitler gained from the Pact. He regarded it as his greatest
achievement. It gave him half of Poland and ensured he would not face a war
on two fronts if he invaded Poland. He had promised the Russians they could
have the rest of Poland as well as the Baltic states, but he never intended to
allow Stalin to keep these territories.
It is also clear what Stalin gained from it. It gave him some territory that had
once been part of Russia, but that was not the main point. The real benefit
was time! Stalin did not expect Hitler to keep his word. He knew he was
Hitler’s number one target. But he did not trust Britain and France either. He
did not think they were strong enough or reliable enough as allies against
Hitler. He expected to have to fight Hitler alone at some point. So what he
most needed was time to build up his forces to protect the USSR from the
attack he knew would come.
Consequences
The Pact cleared the way for Hitler to invade Poland. On 1 September 1939
the Germany army invaded Poland from the west, where they met little
resistance. Britain and France demanded he withdraw from Poland or they
would declare war. After the experience of the past three years Hitler was
certain Britain and France would not actually do a nything about this. If he
was planning ahead at all, then in his mind the next move would surely be an
attack against his temporary ally, the USSR. However, Hitler was in for a
surprise. Britain and France kept their pledge. On 3 September they declared
war on Germany.
FOCUS TASK 3.3
How important was the Nazi–Soviet Pact?
These statements suggest different reasons why the Nazi–Soviet
Pact is important.
A. It showed
that
‘internationalism’
had been
completely
abandoned.B. It freed Hitler from
the problem of a two-
front war, which helped
him to conquer Poland
and most of Western
Europe in 1939–40.C. It exposed Britain
and France’s hope
that Nazi Germany
and the USSR would
fight each other
rather than them.
D. It showed
that Britain
feared Stalin’s
USSR as much
as Hitler’s
Germany.E. It gave Stalin time to
build up forces for
future war with
Germany.F. It gave Hitler the
confidence to defy
Britain and France
and attack Poland.
1  In groups decide which statements fit best under each of these
headings
The Nazi–Soviet Pact was important because…
… it demonstrated important
aspects of international relations at
this time.… it had direct military
and political
consequences.
  
2  Now take one comment from each column and explain:
    a)  how the Nazi–Soviet Pact led to this consequence
    b)  whether this would have happened anyway, even without the
Nazi–Soviet Pact.
FOCUS TASK 3.4
What were the long-term consequences of the peace treaties
of 1919–23?
1  You have been filling out your Versailles chart. Now fill out the
final row summarising what Hitler did about Poland.
2  ‘Germany’s bitterness about the Treaty of Versailles was the
cause of Hitler’s aggressive foreign policy.’ How far do you
agree with this statement? Explain your answer carefully.
FOCUS TASK 3.5
Was the policy of Appeasement justified?
1  Work in pairs or groups. Collect evidence from pages 74–75 to
support each of the above views.
2  Choose one viewpoint that you most agree with and write some
well-argued paragraphs to explain your choice:
    a)  what the viewpoint means – in your own words
    b)  what evidence there is to support it
    c)  what evidence there is against it and why you have rejected
that evidence
    d)  your conclusion as to why this is a good verdict.
Was Appeasement justified?
Chamberlain was not a coward or a weakling. When he had no choice but to
declare war in 1939 h e did. Most people and most politicians at the time
supported Appeasement.
Yet when Hitler broke his promises and the policy did not stop w ar, the
supporters of Appeasement quickly turned against the policy, some claiming
that they had been oppos ed all along. Appeasers were portrayed as naïve,
foolish or weak – Source 33 is one of hundreds of examples which parody
the policy and the people who pursued it. Historians since then and popu lar
opinion too have judged Chamberlain very harshly. Chamberlain’s ‘peace for
our time’ speech is presented as self-deception and a betrayal. Chamberlain
and his Cabinet are seen as ‘second-rate politicians’ who were out of their
depth as events unfolded before them. On the other hand, the oppon ents of
Appeasement such as Winston Churchill are portrayed as REALISTS who were
far-sighted and brave.
SOURCE 33

A cartoon by the American artist Dr Seuss
published on 13 August 1941 (before the
USA entered the Second World War).
Think!
1  What is Source 33 trying to say about the policy of
Appeasement?
2  Make a list of the reasons why Appeasement has generally been
seen in negative terms.
3  Churchill once remarked to President Roosevelt, ‘History will
judge us kindly because I shall write the history’. Read Source
34. How should this affect our viewpoints on Appeasement?
SOURCE 34
The Gathering Storm has been one of the most influential books of
our time. It is no exaggeration to claim that it has strongly
influenced the behaviour of Western politicians from Harry S.
Truman to George W. Bush.
… It is a good tale, told by a master story-teller, who did, after all,
win the Nobel prize for literature; but would a prize for fiction have
been more appropriate?
Professor John Charmley of the University of
East Anglia writing about Churchill’s account
of the 1930s called The Gathering Storm.
Until relatively recently the debate has been very one-sided. Yet this debate
matters because the failure of Appeasement to stop H itler has had a profound
influence on British and American foreign policy ever since. It is now seen
as the ‘right thing’ to stand up to dictators. But are we learning the right
lessons from the story of Appeasement? Before we leap so quickly to
judgement on this issue, let’s run this argument through three different checks.
SOURCE 35
So how did my pre-emptive strategy stand up to a computer stress
test? Not as well as I had hoped, I have to confess. The Calm & the
Storm made it clear that lining up an anti-German coalition in 1938
might have been harder than I’d assumed. To my horror, the
French turned down the alliance I proposed to them. It also turned
out that, when I did go to war with Germany, my own position was
pretty weak. The nadir [low point] was a successful German
invasion of England, a scenario my book rules out as militarily too
risky.
Professor Niall Ferguson in an article for the
New York Magazine, 16 October 2006.
Check 1: If Chamberlain had stood up to
Hitler in 1938 what would have happened?
The historian Professor Niall Ferguson of Harvard University has set out
some ‘counter-factual’ scenarios – suggesting what might have happened if
particular policies were followed. In particular, he has argued that
confronting Hitler in 1938 i nstead of appeasing him ‘would have paid
handsome dividends. Even if it had come to war over Czechoslovakia,
Germany would not have won. Germany’s defences were not yet ready for a
two-front war’.
Professor Ferguson then had the chance to test his scenario by playing a
computer game! The Calm & the Storm is a pow erful simulation which
allows users to make decisions and then computes the possible impact of
those decisions. You can read his conclusions in Source 35.
Check 2: Did Appeasement buy time for
Chamberlain to rearm Britain?
One of the strongest arguments for Appeasement was that in 1938 B ritain
simply was not equipped to fight a war with Germany. So did Appeasement
allow Britain to catch up?
In the 1960s  British historian A.J.P. Taylor argued that Chamberlain had an
exaggerated view of Germany’s strength. Taylor believed that German forces
were only 45 pe r cent of what British intelligence reports said they were.
But Taylor was writing in 1965 – n ot much help to Chamberlain in the 1930s .
The Government had talked about rearmament since 1935 bu t Britain only
really started rearming when Chamberlain became prime minister in 1937.
Chamberlain certainly thought that Britain’s armed forces were not ready for
war in 1938. His own military advisers and his intelligence services told
him this. As you can see from Figure 36 aircraft production increased
massively in 1939.
FIGURE 36
Aircraft production in Britain and Germany,
1936–39.
Check 3: Did Chamberlain have any realistic
alternatives?
In the 2000s  some historians began to accept that Chamberlain made mistakes
and that he probably underestimated Hitler and ove rrated his own abilities.
At the same time, they also questioned whether there were any realistic
alternatives to the policies that Chamberlain followed which would have
stoppe d Hitler, mainly because Hitler was determined to have a war. British
historian Andrew Stedman (Source 37) is a good e xample.
SOURCE 37
It was easy to criticise Chamberlain from the side-lines. It was
more difficult to suggest a constructive, coherent alternative. So
what were the other options open to Chamberlain?
1 Isolation and absolute pacifism
2 Economic and Colonial Appeasement
3 League of Nations
4 Alliances
5 Armaments and Defence
6 War
All of these options were considered by Chamberlain. Some were
rejected and some were actually tried. In his ultimate failure
Chamberlain’s achievements deserve to be recognised. It is
difficult to believe that the Nazis could have been deterred. War
was the Hitler regime’s main aim. In failing to achieve peace
Chamberlain did at least make clear where the blame lay. History
should give him credit for this.
An extract from Alternatives to Appeasement
by British historian Andrew Stedman, 2011.
FOCUS TASK 3.6
Why had international peace collapsed by 1939?
You have covered a lot of material in the last two chapters. In this
task you are going to make sure that you have the important events
and developments clear in your mind.
1  Work in groups of six. Each take a blank sheet of paper and
write a heading like the ones on the right. On your sheet
summarise the ways in which this factor helped to bring about
the war.
2  Now come back together as a group and write your own
summary of how and why the war broke out. You can use this
structure, but set yourself a word limit of 75 words per
paragraph, less if you can.
Paragraph 1:
(This is the place to explain how resentment against the Versailles
Treaty brought Hitler to power in the first place and guided his
actions in the 1930s.)
Paragraph 2:
(Here you should explain how the failure of the League encouraged
Hitler and made him think he could achieve his aims.)
Paragraph 3:
(Here you should explain how the Depression was an underlying
cause of the failure of the League, Japan’s aggression and Hitler’s
rise to power.)
Paragraph 4:
(Here you should briefly describe what Appeasement was, and
how instead of stopping Hitler it encouraged him. You could also
point out the links between Appeasement and the Depression.)
Paragraph 5:
(Here you should explain how the Nazi–Soviet Pact led to the
invasion of Poland and how that in turn led to war. You could also
point out that these short-term factors probably could not have
happened if there had not been a policy of Appeasement.)
Paragraph 6:
(Here you should comment on Hitler’s overall responsibility. How far
do you agree that Hitler wanted war, planned for it, and if so does
that mean he caused the war?)
Paragraph 7:
(Here you should indicate which factor(s) you think were most
important. This is where you should bring in any of the factors you
discussed in stage 5 of the Focus Task.)
There were important long-term factors which help to explain
why war broke out in 1939. One factor was the Versailles
Treaty. It was important because …
The failure of the League of Nations in the 1930s also
contributed towards the outbreak of war. This was because …
Economic factors also played an important role. The worldwide
economic Depression …
Another factor which helps to explain the outbreak of war was
the policy of Appeasement. Appeasement …
There were also key short-term factors which actually sparked
off the war. One of these was …
Some people describe the Second World War as Hitler’s war. I
think this is a GOOD/POOR description because…
All of these factors played important roles. However, [INSERT
YOUR CHOICE OF FACTOR(S)] was / were particularly
important because …
CHAPTER REVIEW FOCUS TASK
Reaching a judgement
Almost there! In the last task you wrote a clear explanation of the
various reasons why peace collapsed by 1939. However, you need
to go further. You also need to be able to compare the importance
of these reasons (or factors) and see the links between them. For
example, if you were asked this question:
‘The Nazi–Soviet Pact of 1939 was more important than the policy
of Appeasement in causing the Second World War.’ How far do
you agree with this statement?
what would you say? Most students find it hard to explain what
they think and end up giving information about each factor
(describing events) rather than making a judgement and
supporting it. This review task helps you to overcome this
problem.
Stage 1: Understand and evaluate each factor
There are six major factors. The cards analyse why each one might
be seen as:
•  a critical factor (i.e. the war probably would not have happened
without it) or just
•  one of several important factors (i.e. the war could still possibly
have happened without it).
    a)  Read the cards carefully to make sure you understand the
arguments.
    b)  For each of the ‘killer sources’ 1–7 (on pages 78–79) decide
whether this supports the argument that this factor was
critical or just one of several important factors.
Factor 1: The Treaty of Versailles
•  Critical? Versailles and the other treaties created a situation in
Europe which made war inevitable. It was only a matter of time
before Germany tried to seek revenge, overturn the Treaty and
start another war. Many commentators felt at the time that it
was only a question of when war might come not whether it
would.
•  Important? The treaties contributed to the tensions of the time
but they did not create them. Politicians in the 1930s could
have defended the treaties or changed them. It was political
choices in the 1930s which caused war not the treaties.
Factor 2: The failure of the League of Nations
•  Critical? The League of Nations’ job was to make sure that
disputes were sorted out legally. In the 1920s it created a
spirit of co-operation. But, in Manchuria 1931 and Abyssinia
1935–36 the League completely failed to stand up to
aggression by Japan and Italy. This encouraged Hitler’s
aggression from 1936 onwards since he believed no one would
try to stop him.
•  Important? The League never really fulfilled the role of
peacekeeper – even in the 1920s it gave in to Italy over Corfu.
The failure of the League in the 1930s was important because
it encouraged Hitler, but even if the League had been stronger
Hitler would still have tried to overturn the Treaty of Versailles
and to destroy communism.
Factor 3: The worldwide economic Depression
•  Critical? The Depression critically weakened the League of
Nations. It destroyed the spirit of international CO-OPERATION
which had built up in the 1920s, and set countries against each
other. Without the Depression leading to these problems there
could not have been a war.
•  Important? The Depression was certainly important – it made
Japan and Italy invade Manchuria and Abyssinia. It brought
Hitler to power in Germany and started German rearmament.
However, it is linked to all the other factors – it did not cause
the war in itself. Even with the Depression Hitler could have
been stopped if Britain and France had had the will to resist
him. The Depression did not make war inevitable.
Factor 4: The policy of Appeasement
•  Critical? Appeasement was critical because it made Hitler
think he could get away with anything. Britain and France could
have stopped Hitler in 1936 when he marched troops into the
Rhineland but their nerve failed. From this point on Hitler felt he
could not lose and took gamble after gamble. As a result of
Appeasement he did not even believe Britain would fight him
when he invaded Poland in 1939.
•  Important? The policy of Appeasement only came about
because, without the USA, the League of Nations, and its
leading members Britain and France, were not strong enough
to keep peace. The Depression so weakened Britain and
France that they did not have the money to oppose Hitler. The
policy of Appeasement would not have been followed without
these other factors.
Factor 5: The Nazi–Soviet Pact
•  Critical? Although Hitler thought that Britain and France would
not fight him he was not sure about the Soviet Union. So the
Soviet Union was the only country that stood in the way of his
plans. Without the Nazi–Soviet Pact, Hitler would not have
taken the gamble to invade Poland and war would never have
begun.
•  Important? The Pact allowed Hitler to invade Poland, but war
was already inevitable before that – due to Hitler’s actions and
his hatred of communism. Hitler had made clear his plans to
take land from the USSR. Plus it was the policy of
Appeasement that drove Stalin to sign the Pact because he
thought he could not rely on the support of Britain or France to
oppose Hitler.
Factor 6: Hitler’s actions
•  Critical? There could have been no war without Hitler. It was
Hitler’s vision of Lebensraum, his hatred of communism and his
determination to reverse the Versailles settlement which led to
war. He consciously built up Germany’s army and weapons
with the intention of taking it to war. At each stage of the road
to war from 1936 to 1939 it was Hitler’s beliefs, actions or
decisions that caused the problem.
•  Important? Hitler was the gambler. He only did what he could
get away with. So without the weakness of the League of
Nations, or the reluctance of Britain, France or the Soviet Union
to stand up to him; without the flawed treaties; without the
economic problems of the 1930s, Hitler would not have got
anywhere. He would have been forced to follow a more
peaceful foreign policy and there would have been no war.
Stage 2: Investigate connections between factors
From Stage 1 it should be clear to you that these factors are
connected to each other. Let’s investigate these connections.
a)  Make six simple cards with just the factor heading.
b)  Display your cards on a large sheet of paper and draw lines
connecting them together. Some links are already mentioned on
the cards on page 77 but you may be able to think of many
more.
c)  Write an explanation along each link. For example, between ‘the
policy of Appeasement’ and ‘The Nazi–Soviet Pact’ you might
write:
‘The policy of Appeasement helped cause the Nazi–Soviet Pact.
It alarmed Stalin so that he felt he had to make his own deal
with Hitler thinking that France and Britain would just give him
whatever he wanted.’
d)  Take a photo of your finished chart.
Stage 3: Rank the factors
Which of these factors is most important? In Stage 2 you will
already have started to draw your own conclusions about this. It
will be really helpful when you come to answering questions about
relative importance if you have already decided what you think!
Remember there is no right answer to which is most important, but
whatever your view you must be able to support it with key points
and with evidence. So:
a)  Take your cards and put them in a rank order of importance.
b)  To justify your order, in the space between each card you need
to be able to complete this sentence: ‘X was more important
than Y because…’
Stage 4: Compare two factors
Back to the question we started with:
‘The Nazi–Soviet Pact of 1939 was more important than the policy
of Appeasement in causing the Second World War.’ How far do
you agree with this statement?
With all the thinking that you have done you should have already
made up your mind on what you think, but to help you structure and
support your argument you could complete a chart like this. NB If
you can include the killer source in your written answer, all the
better.
 Reasons more Reasons less
important important
Policy of
Appeasement  
Nazi–Soviet Pact   
Killer sources and quotations
SOURCE 1
When war came in 1939, it was a result of twenty years of
decisions taken or not taken, not of arrangements made in 1919.
Historian Margaret Macmillan writing in
2001.
SOURCE 2
The failure of the World Disarmament Conference not only
crushed the hopes of many supporters of the League of Nations
and the disarmament movements but also strengthened the
ranks of those who opted for appeasement or some form of
pacifism. Pressures for collective action gave way to policies of
self-defence, neutrality and isolation. Against such a
background, the balance of power shifted steadily away from the
status quo nations in the direction of those who favoured its
destruction. The reconstruction of the 1920s was not inevitably
doomed to collapse by the start of the 1930s. Rather, the demise
of the Weimar Republic and the triumph of Hitler proved the
motor force of destructive systemic change.
Historian Zara Steiner writing in 2011.
SOURCE 3
If new accounts by historians show that statesmen were able to
use the League to ease tensions and win time in the 1920s, no
such case appears possible for the 1930s. Indeed, the League’s
processes may have played a role in that deterioration.
Diplomacy requires leaders who can speak for their states; it
requires secrecy; and it requires the ability to make credible
threats. The Covenant’s security arrangements met none of those
criteria.
Historian Susan Pedersen writing in 2007.
SOURCE 4
We turn our eyes towards the lands of the east … When we
speak of new territory in Europe today, we must principally think
of Russia and the border states subject to her. Destiny itself
seems to wish to point out the way for us here. Colonisation of
the eastern frontiers is of extreme importance. It will be the duty
of Germany’s foreign policy to provide large spaces for the
nourishment and settlement of the growing population of
Germany.
Adolf Hitler, Mein Kampf, 1925.
SOURCE 5
The vindictiveness of British and French peace terms helped to
pave the way for Nazism in Germany and a renewal of
hostilities. World War 2 resulted from the very silly and
humiliating punitive peace imposed on Germany after World War
1.
Historian George Kennan writing in 1984.
SOURCE 6
By repeatedly surrendering to force, Chamberlain has
encouraged aggression … our central contention, therefore, is
that Mr Chamberlain’s policy has throughout been based on a
fatal misunderstanding of the psychology of dictatorship.
The Yorkshire Post, December 1938.
SOURCE 7
The effects of the depression encouraged not only the
emergence of authoritarian and interventionist governments but
led to the shattering of the global financial system. Most
European states followed ‘beggar-thy-neighbour’ tactics.
Germany, Hungary, and most of the East European states
embarked on defensive economic policies – often at cost to their
neighbours.
Historian Zara Steiner writing in 2011.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Anschluss
•  Anti-Comintern Pact
•  Appeasement
•  Bolshevism
•  Communism
•  Conscription
•  Lebensraum
•  Mein Kampf
•  Mobilised
•  Munich Agreement
•  Nazi–Soviet Pact
•  November Criminals
•  Polish Corridor
•  Radical
•  Rearmament
•  Remilitarisation
•  Spanish Civil War
•  Sudetenland
Chapter Summary
The collapse of international peace
  1  The late 1920s had been a time of hope for international
relations with a series of agreements that seemed to make the
world a more peaceful place with countries co-operating and
trading with each other.
  2  The Great Depression of the 1930s led to political turmoil in
many countries and the rise of the dictators such as Hitler in
Germany. Hitler formed alliances with other right-wing regimes
in Italy and Japan.
  3  Germany was still unhappy about its treatment under the Treaty
of Versailles and Hitler set out to challenge the terms of the
Treaty of Versailles, first of all by rearming Germany (secretly
from 1933, then publicly from 1935).
  4  He also challenged the Treaty, for example by sending troops
into the DEMILITARISED ZONE of the Rhineland in 1936.
  5  The League of Nations and Britain and France did not try to
stop Hitler doing these things. This policy was called
Appeasement – giving Hitler what he wanted in the hope he
would not ask for more.
  6  The most famous act of Appeasement was over the
Sudetenland – an area of Czechoslovakia that Hitler wanted to
take over.
  7  In the Munich Agreement (October 1938) Britain and France let
Hitler have the Sudetenland as long as he did not try to take
over the rest of Czechoslovakia. When Hitler invaded the rest of
Czechoslovakia in early 1939 it marked the end of the policy of
Appeasement and they told Hitler that any further expansion
would lead to war.
  8  Although Hitler was very anticommunist and saw Stalin and the
USSR as his enemy, he signed a Pact with Stalin in 1939 to not
attack each other but to divide Poland between them.
  9  When Hitler invaded Poland in September 1939 Britain declared
war on Germany.
10  Hitler’s foreign policy played a major role in causing the Second
World War but historians argue that there were other very
important factors that contributed as well, particularly the
economic Depression, the failures of the League of Nations and
the unfairness of the post-First World War peace treaties.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  What was the policy of Appeasement? [4]
    (b)  What was the significance of the Munich Agreement of
1938? [6]
    (c)  ‘Appeasement was a wise policy that delayed war until
Britain was ready.’ How far do you agree with this
statement? Explain your answer. [10]
2  Study Source 27 on page 70. What is the message of the
cartoonist? Use details of the source and your own knowledge to
explain your answer.
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
PART 2 The Cold War and the
Gulf, 1945–2000
Focus
The Second World War led to a decisive change in the balance of pow er
around the world. The countries that had dom inated European affairs from
1919 t o 1939 s uch as France, Britain and Germany were now much poor er or
less pow erful. World history was much more affected by what the leaders of
the new ‘superpowers’ (the USA and the USSR) believed and did. So the big
story of Part 2 is how the superpowers became enemies, how they clashed
(directly or indirectly) during the Cold War and how they tried to influence
the affairs of other countries.
•  In Chapter 4 you will examine the short-term causes of the Cold War. Why
did the USA and the USSR, who had fought together as allies against
Hitler, fall out and enter a 40-year period of  tension and distrust?
•  One of the USA’s obsessions in this Cold War period w as to hold back the
spread of communism. Chapter 5 examines why it so feared the spread of
communism, how it tried to contain it and helps you to judge how
successful it was.
•  While the USA was trying to contain communism, the Soviet Union was
trying to shore it up in its eastern European neighbours. This was no easy
task. It faced frequent protests and problems. In Chapter 6 you will
consider how it did this, how far it succeeded and why in the end it all
came crashing dow n with the demolition of the BERLIN WALL and the
collapse of the Soviet Union itself.
•  Finally, in Chapter 7 you will shift your focus to the Arabian Gulf and the
intertwined fates of two countries Iraq and Iran. You will examine how
they developed in the period 1970–2000 a nd why they came into conflict
with each other and with the Western pow ers.
The events in these chapters overlap. The timeline below gives you an
overview of the main events you will be studying. It would be helpful if you
made your own copy and added your own notes to it as you study.
4 Who was to blame for the Cold
War?
FOCUS POINTS
•  Why did the USA–USSR alliance begin to break down in 1945?
•  How had the USSR gained control of eastern Europe by 1948?
•  How did the USA react to Soviet expansionism?
•  What were the consequences of the Berlin Blockade?
•  Who was the more to blame for starting the Cold War: the USA
or the USSR?

It is not just cartoons that can have messages. Photos can too. This
photo shows American and Soviet soldiers shaking hands in April
1945. It was a staged photograph. The US commander General
Bradley knew the Soviet and US troops would meet on 25 April and
ordered the poster to be erected. US Army photographers set up
the scene.
1  What is the message of the photo?
2  How far do you trust it to show relations between the USA and
the USSR in 1945?
In May 1945 A merican troops  entered Berlin from the west, as Russian
troops  moved in from the east. They met and celebrated victory together. Yet
three years later these former allies were arguing over Berlin and war
between them seemed a real possibility.
What had gone wrong?
In this chapter you will consider:
•  how the wartime ALLIANCE between the USA and the USSR broke dow n
•  how the SOVIET UNION gained control over eastern Europe and how the
USA responded
•  the consequences of the BERLIN BLOCKADE in 1948.
The key question you will be returning to at the end is who is most to blame
for this increasing tension (which became known as the ‘COLD WAR’).
•  Was it the USSR and SSTALIN with his insistence on taking over and
controlling eastern Europe?
•  Or was it the USA and President Truman with the TRUMAN DOCTRINE and
MARSHALL AID?
•  Or should they share the blame? In the post-war chaos in Europe they both
saw it as their role to extend their influence, to proclaim the benefits of
their own political system and denounce the other side.
•  Or was the Cold War inevitable – be yond the control of either country? Is
‘blame’ the wrong word to use?
Here are some of the factors that you will study in this chapter. At the end
you will be asked to become an expert in one of them so you could help
yourself by making notes about each one as you read the chapter.
Why did the USA–USSR alliance begin
to break down in 1945?
Allies against Hitler
The USA, USSR and Britain fought together as allies during the Second
World War. However, it was a strategic wartime alliance not a bond of
brotherhood. The USSR had been a communist country for more than 30
years. The majority of politicians and business leaders in Britain and the
USA hated and feared communist ideas (see the Factfile on page 85). In the
past they had helped the enemies of the communists. This made the USSR
wary of Britain and the USA. So in many ways the surprising thing is that
these old rivals managed a war-time alliance at all. But they did and by 1945
they had defeated Germany.
ACTIVITY
Create your own version of the central blue row of the timeline on
pages 80–81. You will be adding events and comments to it
throughout the chapter to help you in your final Focus Task.
Use the information on these two pages to mark any events or
developments that might affect relationships between the USA and
the Soviet Union.
SOURCE 1
A British cartoon from 1941, with the caption
‘Love conquers all’. The figure in the centre of
the bench is Stalin and he is being charmed
by US President Roosevelt (on the left) and
British leader Winston Churchill. The small
figure is Hitler. Hitler is shown as Cupid,
whose arrows cause people to fall in love.
Source Analysis
Cartoons often criticise particular people or their actions. Sometimes
they praise. Sometimes they simply comment on a situation. Would
you say Source 1 is criticising, praising or commenting? Explain
what features of the cartoon helped you to decide.
SOURCE 2
For Americans, private property was sacred and formed the basis
for the rule of law, while for the Soviets private property was the
source of all evil and inequality, preventing the development of all
humanity to a bright and fair future. While in the West people were
taught that if you work harder you better yourself, in the East
people were taught that if they work harder, society gets richer and
they would share in that. Both systems advocated freedom and
democracy, but their understanding of these terms was totally
different. Both sides believed that government should be for the
benefit of the majority of the population. For the USA, this was
ensured by free choice through the ballot box. For Communists,
there was no need for free choice because the Communist party
understood the hopes and needs of the people even better than the
people themselves.
Historian Eleanor Hore of the University of
Essex, UK.
Rivals with differing world views
To understand how the alliance broke dow n we need to understand the
beliefs of the two sides.
There was a clash of ideologies between communist and CAPITALIST beliefs
as the Factfile (page 85) explains, but this was tied up with strong national
pride and a sense of identity as well (see Source 2).
•  Most Americans believed passionately that their way of life was best and
they were justifiably proud of the leading role the USA took in defeating
NAZISM.
•  At the same time most Soviet people were equally proud of their country’s
critical role in defeating Germany (which came at a devastating cost).
They too be lieved their way of life was superior.
Factfile
A clash of ideologies
The USA The USSR
The USA was
capitalist. Business and
property were privately
owned.The USSR was communist. All industry
was owned and run by the state.
It was a DEMOCRACY. Its
government was
chosen in free
democratic elections.It was a one-party DICTATORSHIP.
Elections were held, but all candidates
belonged to the Communist Party.
It was the world’s
wealthiest country. But
as in most capitalist
countries, there were
extremes – some
people were very
wealthy while others
were very poor.It was an economic superpower
because its industry had grown rapidly
in the 1920s and 1930s, but the general
standard of living in the USSR was
much lower than in the USA. Even so,
unemployment was rare and extreme
poverty was rarer than in the USA.
For Americans, being
free of control by the
government was more
important than
everyone being equal.For communists, the rights of individuals
were seen as less important than the
good of society as a whole. So
individuals’ lives were tightly controlled.
Most Americans firmly
believed that other
countries should be run
in the American way.Most Soviet people believed that other
countries should be run in the
communist way.
People in the USA
were alarmed by
communist theory,
which talked of
spreading revolution.COMMUNISM taught that the role of a
communist state was to encourage
communist revolutions worldwide. In
practice, the USSR’s leaders tended to
take practical decisions rather than be
led by this ideology.
Americans generally
saw their policies as
‘doing the right thing’
rather than serving the
interests of the USA.Many in the USSR saw the USA’s
actions as selfishly building its
economic empire and political influence.
ACTIVITY
You need to know the information in the Factfile. Make your own
copies of the diagrams on the right and then use the Factfile to
make notes around them summarising the two systems.
Superpowers
The USA and the USSR had emerged from the war as the two world
‘SUPERPOWERS’. After the Second World War former world-leading pow ers
like Britain and France were effectively relegated to a second division. US
leaders felt there was a responsibility attached to being a superpower. In the
1930s , the USA had followed a policy of isolation – keeping out of European
and world affairs. The Americans might have disapproved of Soviet
communism, but they tried not to get involved. However, by the 1940s  the US
attitude had changed. Roosevelt had set the Americans firmly against a policy
of isolation and this effectively meant oppos ing communism. There would be
no more appeasement of DICTATORS. From now on, every communist action
would meet an American reaction.
The Yalta Conference, February 1945
In February 1945 i t was clear that Germany was losing the European war, so
the Allied leaders met at Yalta in the Ukraine to plan what would happen to
Europe after Germany’s defeat. The YALTA CONFERENCE went well. Despite
their differences, the BIG THREE – Stalin, Roosevelt and Churchill – agreed
on some important matters. These are summarised in the tables below.
It seemed that, although they could not all agree, they were still able to
negotiate and do bu siness with one another.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember at least two examples of agreement
at Yalta and one (the main!) disagreement.
ACTIVITY
The photograph on page 1 of this book shows the Big Three at the
Yalta Conference. In 1945 radio was the main medium for news.
Imagine you were describing the scene in this photo for a radio
audience. Describe for the listeners:
•  the obvious points (such as people you can see)
•  the less obvious points (such as the mood of the scene)
•  the agreements and disagreements the Big Three had come to.
Agreements at Yalta
 Japan
Stalin agreed to enter the
war against Japan once
Germany had
surrendered.
 Germany
They agreed that Germany would be
divided into four zones: American,
French, British and Soviet.
 Elections
They agreed that as
countries were liberated
from occupation by the
German army, they would
be allowed to hold free
elections to choose the
government they wanted.
 United Nations
The Big Three all agreed to join the
new UNITED NATIONS organisation, which
would aim to keep peace after the war.
 War criminals
  Eastern Europe
As Allied soldiers
advanced through
Germany, they were
revealing the horrors of
the Nazi CONCENTRATION
CAMPS. The Big Three
agreed to hunt down and
punish war criminals who
were responsible for the
genocide.The Soviet Union had suffered terribly
in the war. An estimated 20 million
Soviet people had died. Stalin was
therefore concerned about the future
security of the USSR and specifically
the risk of another invasion from
Europe. The Big Three agreed that
eastern Europe should be seen as a
‘SOVIET SPHERE OF INFLUENCE’.
Disagreements at Yalta
 Poland
The only real disagreement was about Poland.
•  Stalin wanted the border of the USSR to move westwards into
Poland. Stalin argued that Poland, in turn, could move its border
westwards into German territory.
•  Churchill did not approve of Stalin’s plans for Poland, but he also
knew that there was not very much he could do about it because
Stalin’s RED ARMY was in total control of both Poland and eastern
Germany.
•  Roosevelt was also unhappy about Stalin’s plan, but Churchill
persuaded Roosevelt to accept it, as long as the USSR agreed
not to interfere in Greece where the British were attempting to
prevent the communists taking over. Stalin accepted this.
SOURCE 3
We argued freely and frankly across the table. But at the end, on
every point, unanimous agreement was reached … We know, of
course, that it was Hitler’s hope and the German war lords’ hope
that we would not agree – that some slight crack might appear in
the solid wall of allied unity … But Hitler has failed. Never before
have the major allies been more closely united – not only in their
war aims but also in their peace aims.
Extract from President Roosevelt’s report to
the US Congress on the Yalta Conference.
SOURCE 4
I want to drink to our alliance, that it should not lose its … intimacy,
its free expression of views … I know of no such close alliance of
three Great Powers as this … May it be strong and stable, may we
be as frank as possible.
Stalin, proposing a toast at a dinner at the
Yalta Conference, 1945.
Source Analysis
Behind the scenes at Yalta
The war against Hitler had united Roosevelt, Stalin and Churchill and
at the Yalta Conference they appeared to get on well. But what was
going on behind the scenes? Sources 5–9 will help you decide.
SOURCE 5
In the hallway [at Yalta] we stopped before a map of the world on
which the Soviet Union was coloured in red. Stalin waved his
hand over the Soviet Union and exclaimed, ‘They [Roosevelt and
Churchill] will never accept the idea that so great a space should
be red, never, never!’
Milovan Djilas writing about Yalta in 1948.
SOURCE 6
I have always worked for friendship with Russia but, like you, I
feel deep anxiety because of their misinterpretation of the Yalta
decisions, their attitude towards Poland, their overwhelming
influence in the Balkans excepting Greece, the difficulties they
make about Vienna, the combination of Russian power and the
territories under their control or occupied, coupled with the
Communist technique in so many other countries, and above all
their power to maintain very large Armies in the field for a long
time. What will be the position in a year or two?
Extract from a telegram sent by Prime
Minister Churchill to President Truman in
May 1945.
SOURCE 7
Perhaps you think that just because we are the allies of the
English we have forgotten who they are and who Churchill is.
There’s nothing they like better than to trick their allies. During the
First World War they constantly tricked the Russians and the
French. And Churchill? Churchill is the kind of man who will pick
your pocket of a kopeck! [A kopeck is a low value Soviet coin.]
And Roosevelt? Roosevelt is not like that. He dips in his hand only
for bigger coins. But Churchill? He will do it for a kopeck.
Stalin speaking to a fellow communist,
Milovan Djilas, in 1945. Djilas was a
supporter of Stalin.
SOURCE 8
The Soviet Union has become a danger to the free world. A new
front must be created against her onward sweep. This front should
be as far east as possible. A settlement must be reached on all
major issues between West and East in Europe before the armies
of democracy melt.
Churchill writing to Roosevelt shortly after
the Yalta Conference. Churchill ordered his
army leader Montgomery to keep German
arms intact in case they had to be used
against the Russians.
SOURCE 9
Once, Churchill asked Stalin to send him the music of the new
Soviet Russian anthem so that it could be broadcast before the
summary of the news from the Soviet German front. Stalin sent
the words [as well] and expressed the hope that Churchill would
set about learning the new tune and whistling it to members of the
Conservative Party. While Stalin behaved with relative discretion
with Roosevelt, he continually teased Churchill throughout the war.
Written by Soviet historian Sergei
Kudryashov after the war.
1  Draw a simple diagram like this and use Sources 5–9 to
summarise what each of the leaders thought of the other.
2  How do Sources 5–9 affect your impression of the Yalta
Conference?
3  How far do you trust these sources to tell you what the leaders
actually thought of each other?
The Potsdam Conference, July 1945
In May 1945, t hree months after the Yalta Conference, Allied troops  reached
Berlin. Hitler committed suicide. Germany surrendered. The war in Europe
was won.
A second conference of the Allied leaders was arranged for July 1945 i n the
Berlin suburb of Potsdam. However, in the five months since Yalta a number
of changes had taken place which would greatly affect relationships between
the leaders.
Changes since Yalta
1 Stalin’s armies were occupying most of eastern Europe
Soviet troops had liberated country after country in eastern Europe,
but instead of withdrawing his troops Stalin had left them there.
Refugees were fleeing out of these countries fearing a communist
take-over. Stalin had set up a communist government in Poland,
ignoring the wishes of the majority of Poles. He insisted that his
control of eastern Europe was a defensive measure against possible
future attacks.
2 America had a new president
On 12 April 1945, President Roosevelt died. He was replaced by his
vice-president, Harry Truman. Truman was a very different man from
Roosevelt. He was much more anticommunist than Roosevelt and
was very suspicious of Stalin. Truman and his advisers saw Soviet
actions in eastern Europe as preparations for a Soviet take-over of
the rest of Europe.
3 The Allies had tested an atomic bomb
On 16 July 1945 the Americans successfully tested an ATOMIC BOMB
at a desert site in the USA. At the start of the POTSDAM CONFERENCE,
Truman informed Stalin about it.
Think!
1  At Yalta, Churchill and Roosevelt had agreed with Stalin that
eastern Europe would be a Soviet ‘sphere of influence’. Do you
think Source 10 is what they had in mind?
2  Explain how each of the three changes since Yalta described in
the text might affect relationships at Potsdam.
3  What is your overall impression of Source 11:
    a)  a reasonable assessment of Stalin based on the facts
    b)  an overreaction to Stalin based on fear and prejudice against
the USSR?
Use extracts from the source to support your view.
SOURCE 10
This war is not as in the past; whoever occupies a territory also
imposes on it his own social system. Everyone imposes his own
system as far as his army has power to do so. It cannot be
otherwise.
Stalin speaking soon after the end of the
Second World War about the take-over of
eastern Europe.
SOURCE 11
Unless Russia is faced with an iron fist and strong language
another war is in the making. Only one language do they
understand – ‘how many [army] divisions have you got?’ … I’m
tired of babying the Soviets.
President Truman, writing to his Secretary of
State in January 1946.
Stalin v. Truman
The Potsdam Conference finally got under way on 17 J uly 1945. Not
surprisingly, it did not go as smoothly as Yalta.
To change the situation further still, in July there was an election in Britain.
Winston Churchill was defeated, so half way through the conference he was
replaced by a new prime minister, Clement Attlee. In the absence of
Churchill, the conference was dom inated by rivalry and suspicion between
Stalin and Truman. A number of issues arose on which neither side seemed
able to appreciate the other’s point of view (see table on page 89).
SOURCE 12
An official publicity photograph of the leaders
of the Big Three at the Potsdam Conference.
The new British prime minister Clement Atlee
is on the left, new US president Harry Truman
is in the centre and Stalin is on the right.
Think!
Compare Source 12 with the photo of the Yalta Conference on
page 1 (which you analysed in the Activity on page 86).
1  How is this picture similar or different?
2  How accurately do you think this picture represents relations at
the Potsdam Conference?
Disagreements at Potsdam
 Germany
Stalin wanted to cripple Germany completely to protect the USSR against
future threats. Truman did not want to repeat the mistake of the TREATY OF
VERSAILLES.
 Reparations
Twenty million Russians had died in the war and the Soviet Union had been
devastated. Stalin wanted compensation from Germany. Truman, however,
was once again determined not to repeat the mistakes at the end of the First
World War and resisted this demand.
 Eastern Europe
At Yalta, Stalin had won agreement from the Allies that he could set up pro-
Soviet governments in eastern Europe. He said, ‘If the Slav [the majority of
east European] people are united, no one will dare move a finger against
them’. Truman became very unhappy about Russian intentions and soon
adopted a ‘get tough’ attitude towards Stalin.
FOCUS TASK 4.1
Why did the USA–USSR alliance begin to break down in 1945?
Under the following headings, make notes to summarise why the
Allies began to fall out in 1945:
•  Personalities
•  Actions by the USA
•  Actions by the USSR
•  Misunderstandings
Revision Tip
Your notes from the Focus Task will be useful for revision. Make
sure you can remember one example of each reason for the falling
out.
How did the USSR gain control of
eastern Europe by 1948?
The ‘iron curtain’
The Potsdam Conference ended without complete agreement on any of the
disagreements on the previous page. Over the next nine months, Stalin
achieved the dom ination of eastern Europe that he was seeking. By 1946
Poland, Hungary, Romania, Bulgaria and Albania all had communist
governments which owed their loyalty to Stalin. Churchill described the
border between Soviet-controlled countries and the West as an ‘IRON
CURTAIN’ (see Source 13). The name stuck.
SOURCE 13
A shadow has fallen upon the scenes so lately lighted by the Allied
victory. From Stettin on the Baltic to Trieste on the Adriatic, an iron
curtain has descended. Behind that line lie all the states of central
and eastern Europe. The Communist parties have been raised to
power far beyond their numbers and are seeking everywhere to
obtain totalitarian control. This is certainly not the liberated Europe
we fought to build. Nor is it one which allows permanent peace.
Winston Churchill speaking in the USA, in the
presence of President Truman, March 1946.
Letters and telegrams between Truman and
Churchill suggest that Truman was aware of
what Churchill planned to say and approved.
SOURCE 14
The following circumstances should not be forgotten. The Germans
made their invasion of the USSR through Finland, Poland and
Romania. The Germans were able to make their invasion through
these countries because, at the time, governments hostile to the
Soviet Union existed in these countries. What can there be
surprising about the fact that the Soviet Union, anxious for its future
safety, is trying to see to it that governments loyal in their attitude to
the Soviet Union should exist in these countries?
Stalin, replying to Churchill’s speech (Source
13).
SOURCE 15
A British cartoon commenting on Churchill’s
‘iron curtain’ speech, in the Daily Mail, 6
March 1946.
SOURCE 16
A Soviet cartoon. Churchill is shown with two
flags, the first proclaiming that ‘Anglo-Saxons
must rule the world’ and the other threatening
an ‘iron curtain’. Notice who is formed by his
shadow!
Source Analysis
1  How do Sources 13 and 14 differ in their interpretation of Stalin’s
actions?
2  Explain why they see things so differently.
3  How do Sources 15 and 16 differ in their interpretation of
Churchill?
4  Explain why there are differences.
Think!
Some historians say that Churchill is as much to blame for the post-
war distrust between the Soviet Union and the West as Roosevelt,
Truman or Stalin. What evidence is there on pages 86–90 to
support or challenge this view?
Stalin strengthens his grip
Figure 17 shows how Stalin extended Soviet pow er across eastern Europe.
With communist governments established throughout eastern Europe, Stalin
gradually tightened his control in each country. The SECRET POLICE
imprisoned anyone who oppos ed communist rule.
Cominform
In October 1947, S talin set up the Communist Information Bureau, or
COMINFORM, to co-ordinate the work of the communist parties of eastern
Europe. Cominform regularly brought the leaders of each communist party to
Moscow to be briefed by Stalin and his ministers. This also allowed Stalin
to keep a close eye on them. He spotted independent-minded leaders and
replaced them with people who were completely loyal to him. The only
communist leader who escaped this close control was Tito in Yugoslavia. He
resented being controlled by Cominform and was expelled for his hostility in
1948.
FOCUS TASK 4.2
How did the USSR gain control of eastern Europe?
‘The only important factor in the communist take-over of eastern
Europe was armed force.’ How far do you agree with this
statement?
1  List events which support it.
2  List other methods the communists used.
3  Decide how far you agree with the statement on a scale of 1–5.
Explain your score carefully.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember two examples of methods that the
USSR and the communist parties used to take power in eastern
Europe.
FIGURE 17
The communists in eastern Europe, 1945–48.
How did the USA react to Soviet
expansion?
The WESTERN POWERS were alarmed by Stalin’s take-over of eastern Europe.
Roosevelt, Churchill and their successors had accepted that Soviet security
needed friendly governments in eastern Europe. They had agreed that eastern
Europe would be a Soviet ‘sphere of influence’ and that Stalin would heavily
influence this region. However, they had not expected such complete
communist dom ination. They felt it should have been possible to have
governments in eastern Europe that were both democratic and friendly to the
USSR. Stalin saw his policy in eastern Europe as making himself secure, but
Truman could only see the spread of communism.
SOURCE 18
After all the efforts that have been made and the appeasement that
we followed to try and get a real friendly settlement, not only is the
Soviet government not prepared to co-operate with any non-
Communist government in eastern Europe, but it is actively
preparing to extend its hold over the remaining part of continental
Europe and, subsequently, over the Middle East and no doubt the
Far East as well. In other words, physical control of Europe and
Asia and eventual control of the whole world is what Stalin is
aiming at – no less a thing than that. The immensity of the aim
should not betray us into thinking that it cannot be achieved.
Extract from a report by the British Foreign
Secretary to the British Cabinet in March
1948. The title of the report was ‘The Threat
to Civilisation’.
SOURCE 19
An American cartoon commenting on Stalin’s
take-over of eastern Europe. The bear
represents the USSR.
Source Analysis
1  Do Sources 18 and 19 have the same message?
2  Source 18 is a British source. Does it seem likely that similar
documents were being produced by the American Government?
Give reasons.
As you can see from Figure 17 on page 91, by 1948 G reece and
Czechoslovakia were the only eastern European countries not controlled by
communist governments. It seemed to the Americans that not only Greece and
Czechoslovakia but even Italy and France were vulnerable to communist
take-over. Events in two of these countries were to have a decisive effect on
America’s policy towards Europe.
Greece, 1947
When the Germans retreated from Greece in 1944, t here were two rival
groups – the monarchists and the communists – who wanted to rule the
country. Both had been involved in resistance against the Nazis. The
communists wanted Greece to be a SOVIET REPUBLIC. The monarchists
wanted the return of the king of Greece. Churchill sent British troops  to
Greece in 1945 s uppos edly to help restore order and supervise free
elections. In fact, the British supported the monarchists and the king was
returned to pow er.
In 1946, t he USSR protested to the United Nations that British troops  were a
threat to peace in Greece. The United Nations took no action and so the
communists tried to take control of Greece by force. A CIVIL WAR quickly
developed. The British could not afford the cost of such a war and announced
on 24 F ebruary 1947 t hat they were withdrawing their troops . Truman
stepped in. Paid for by the Americans, some British troops  stayed in Greece.
They tried to prop up the king’s government. By 1950 t he royalists were in
control of Greece, although they were a very weak government, always in
crisis.
The Truman Doctrine
American intervention in Greece marked a new era in the USA’s attitude to
world pol itics, which became known as ‘the Truman Doctrine’ (see Source
20).
Under the Truman Doctrine, the USA was prepared to send money, equipment
and advice to any country which was, in the American view, threatened by a
communist take-over. Truman accepted that eastern Europe was now
communist. His aim was to stop communism from spreading any further. This
policy became known as CONTAINMENT.
The Marshall Plan
Truman believed that communism succeeded when people faced pove rty and
hardship. He sent the Secretary of State and former US Army general George
Marshall to assess the economic state of Europe. What he found was a ruined
economy (see Figure 21). The countries of Europe owed $11.5 bi llion to the
USA. There were extreme shortages of all goods . Most countries were still
rationing bread. There was such a coal shortage in the hard winter of 1947
that in Britain all electricity was turned off for a period each day. Churchill
had described Europe as ‘a rubble heap, a breeding ground of hate’.
SOURCE 20
I believe that it must be the policy of the United States to support
free peoples who are resisting attempted subjugation by armed
minorities or by outside pressures … The free peoples of the world
look to us for support in maintaining those freedoms.
If we falter in our leadership, we may endanger the peace of the
world.
President Truman speaking on 12 March
1947, explaining his decision to help Greece.
FIGURE 21
Marshall suggested that about $17 bi llion would be needed to rebuild
Europe’s prosperity. ‘Our policy’, he said, ‘is directed against hunger,
pove rty, desperation and chaos.’
In December 1947, T ruman put his plan to Congress. For a short time, the
American Congress refused to grant this money. Many Americans were
becoming concerned by Truman’s involvement in foreign affairs. Besides,
$17 bi llion was a lot of money!
Czechoslovakia, 1948
Americans’ attitude changed when the communists took over the government
of Czechoslovakia. Czechoslovakia had been ruled by a coalition
government which, although it included communists, had been trying to
pursue policies independent of Moscow. The communists came dow n hard in
March 1948. Anti-Soviet leaders were purged. One pro-American minister,
Jan Masaryk, was found dead below his open window. The communists said
he had jumped. The Americans suspected he’d been pushed. Immediately,
Congress accepted the MARSHALL PLAN and made $17 bi llion available over
a period of  four years.
Think!
Explain in just 120 characters how events in
a)  Greece
b)  Czechoslovakia
affected American policy in Europe.
Marshall Aid
On the one hand, Marshall Aid was an extremely generous act by the
American people. On the other hand, it was also motivated by American self-
interest.
•  The USA wanted to create new markets for American goods . The
Americans remembered the disastrous effects of the DEPRESSION of the
1930s  and Truman wanted to do a ll he could to prevent another worldwide
slump.
•  Many in the US Government argued that Aid should only be given to states
which embraced democracy and free markets – in other words, a
government and economy the USA would approve of. They wanted an
‘Open Door’ to these countries as the policy was called, with no trade
TARIFFS or other restrictions to stop U S companies.
Stalin viewed Marshall Aid with suspicion. After expressing some initial
interest, he refused to have anything more to do w ith it. He also forbade any
of the eastern European states to apply for Marshall Aid. Stalin’s view was
that the anticommunist aims behind Marshall Aid would weaken his hold on
eastern Europe. He also felt that the USA was trying to dom inate as many
states as possible by making them dependent on dollars.
Think!
1  Draw a diagram to summarise the aims of Marshall Aid. Put
political aims on one side and economic aims on the other. Draw
arrows and labels to show how the two are connected.
2  Which of the problems in post-war Europe shown in Figure 21
do you think would be the most urgent for Marshall Aid to
tackle? Explain your choice.
SOURCE 22
An American cartoon, 1949.
SOURCE 23
A Soviet cartoon commenting on Marshall
Aid. Marshall’s rope spells out the words
‘Marshall Plan’ and the lifebelt magnet is
labelled ‘Aid to Europe’.
Source Analysis
1  Do Sources 22 and 23 support or criticise Marshall Aid?
2  Do you think the sources give a fair impression of Marshall Aid?
Explain your answer.
FOCUS TASK 4.3
How did the USA react to Soviet expansion?
1  Work in pairs to write two accounts of US policy in Europe. One
of you should write from the point of view of the Americans; the
other should write from the point of view of the Soviets. The
sources and text on pages 92–94 will help you.
You should include reference to:
    a)  US actions in the Greek Civil War in 1947
    b)  the Truman Doctrine
    c)  Soviet action in Czechoslovakia in 1948
    d)  the Marshall Plan and Marshall Aid.
As you consider each event, try to use it to make one side look
reasonable or the other side unreasonable – or both!
2  Was the distrust between the USA and the USSR a problem of
action (what each side is actually doing) or interpretation (how
things are seen)?
Revision Tip
Stalin and Truman saw Marshall Aid differently. Try to sum up each
view in a sentence.
The Berlin Blockade: causes and
consequences
By 1948 t he distrust between the USA and the USSR was alarming. The two
sides actually increased their stocks of weapons. A propaganda war
developed. Each side took every oppor tunity to denounce the policies or the
plans of the other. Truman and Stalin were anxious to show each other and
their own people that they would not be pushed around. Despite all the
threatening talk, the two sides had never actually fired on one another. But in
1948 i t looked like they might. The clash came over Germany.
The problem of Germany
After the war, Germany was divided into four zones (see Figure 24). At first
the US plan, known as the Morgenthau Plan, was to remove all German
industry and make it an agricultural country so it could never again wage a
modern war. However, as Truman grew more concerned about the USSR, he
decided that a strong Germany might be a useful ally. It was also clear that if
German industries were not allowed to recover then millions of Germans
would simply starve. In 1946, B ritain, France and the USA combined their
zones. This region became known as West Germany in 1949.
FIGURE 24
The four zones of Germany in 1948.
SOURCE 25
A Soviet cartoon from 1947. It shows (from
left to right) the USA, Britain and France. The
three sticks tied together are labelled
‘American zone’, ‘British zone’ and ‘French
zone’. The building is labelled ‘Yalta and
Potsdam Agreements’.
Source Analysis
Explain what Source 25 is saying about the actions of the USA,
Britain and France in Germany in 1947.
Stalin blockades Berlin
Stalin felt he had to show Western leaders that he would fight back if they
encroached on the Soviet ‘sphere of influence’. Although Berlin was also
divided into four zones, the city itself lay deep in the Soviet zone and was
linked to the western areas by roads, railways and canals. In June 1948,
Stalin blocked these supply lines, stopping the Western Powers reaching their
zones of Berlin. If the USA tried to ram the roadblocks or railway blocks, it
could be seen as an act of war. Stalin expected Truman to announce a
humiliating withdrawal from Berlin, which would give the Soviets control of
Berlin and a propaganda victory.
The Berlin airlift
The Americans believed that the situation in West Berlin was an important
test case. If they gave in to Stalin on this issue and withdrew, the western
zones of Germany might be next to fall to the communist USSR. Truman
ordered that aircraft should fly supplies into Berlin. This was known as the
BERLIN AIRLIFT. As the first planes took off from their bases in West
Germany, everyone feared that the Soviets might shoot them dow n – an
undeniable act of war. People waited anxiously as the planes flew over
Soviet territory, but no shots were fired. For the next ten months, West Berlin
received all the supplies it needed in this way – everything from food a nd
clothing to building materials and oil. Stalin eventually lifted the BLOCKADE
in May 1949.
SOURCE 26
We refused to be forced out of the city of Berlin. We demonstrated
to the people of Europe that we would act and act resolutely, when
their freedom was threatened. Politically it brought the people of
Western Europe closer to us. The Berlin blockade was a move to
test our ability and our will to resist.
President Truman, speaking in 1949.
Source Analysis
Explain why Source 26 is a useful source to historians investigating
US policy on Berlin.
Consequences of the Berlin Blockade
The end of the Berlin Blockade did not end Cold War tensions. But it had
several important consequences for Cold War relationships.
•  A powerful symbol: Berlin became a pow erful symbol of Cold War
rivalry. From the US point of view, it was an oasis of democratic freedom
in the middle of communist repression; from the Soviet point of view, it
was a cancer growing in the workers’ paradise of East Germany.
•  Cold War flashpoint: Berlin was also a Cold War flashpoint. It was one
of the few places where US and Soviet troops  faced each other directly
(and on a daily basis), and it would be vulnerable if the Soviets chose to
act. Later in the Cold War, Berlin would become even more significant.
•  Cold War patterns of thinking and acting: Despite the mistrust shown by
the superpowers, the crisis in Berlin suggested that there would not be a
direct war between them. There would be other types of conflict. Each
side would never trust the other and would never accept that the other had
a valid case or was acting responsibly or morally and would use
propaganda to criticise the other side. They would fight ‘proxy wars’ –
helping any state, group or individual oppos ed to the other side, no matter
what that state, group or individual was like. There were also more formal
alliances (see below).
NATO and the Warsaw Pact
During the blockade, war between the USSR and the USA seemed a real
possibility. At the height of the crisis, the Western Powers met in Washington
DC and signed an agreement to work together. The new organisation, formed
in April 1949, w as known as NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization).
Source 27 shows the main terms of the NATO charter. Although the USSR
was critical of NATO, Stalin took no further action until 1955, w hen the
NATO pow ers allowed West Germany to join the organisation. In response,
the USSR and the main communist states in eastern Europe formed an
alliance known as the WARSAW PACT. Its members promised to defend each
other if any one of them was attacked.
SOURCE 27
Article 3: To achieve the aims of this Treaty, the Parties will keep
up their individual and collective capacity to resist armed attack.
Article 5: The Parties agree that an armed attack against one or
more of them in Europe or North America shall be considered an
attack against them all.
Extracts from the NATO Charter.
FIGURE 28
NATO and the Soviet satellites of eastern
Europe. With the establishment of NATO,
Europe was once again home to two hostile
armed camps, just as it had been in 1914.
Source Analysis
What evidence is there in Source 27 and Figure 28 to indicate that
NATO was a purely defensive alliance?
FOCUS TASK 4.4
What were the consequences of the Berlin Blockade?
Here are some consequences of the Berlin Blockade.
•  The Soviet Union and the West both claimed a victory.
•  The Western Allies set up a military alliance called NATO.
•  Many Westerners left Berlin for good.
•  The airlift showed the West’s commitment to Berlin.
•  The airlift kept Berlin working.
•  Berlin became a symbol of Cold War tension.
•  It ended the four-power administration of Germany and Berlin
and split Germany into two blocs. Germany remained a divided
country for 40 years.
•  There was no fighting – the dispute ended peacefully.
•  It heightened fear of the Soviet Union in the West.
•  The airlift improved relations between Germans and the Allies
(who had so recently been at war).
Write each consequence on a card. Then:
a)  divide the cards into short-term and long-term consequences
b)  choose two which you think are the most significant
consequences and explain your choice.
Revision Tip
For the topic of the Berlin Blockade, aim to be able to explain (with
examples):
•  how the Allies started to rebuild Germany
•  one reason this alarmed Stalin
•  two important consequences of the blockade.
FOCUS TASK 4.5
Who was more to blame for the Cold War?
This is a highly controversial question which is still being debated
today (as you can see from Interpretations A and B)!
Interpretation A: US historian Lynne Viola, writing in 2002.
The orthodox view of the Cold War greatly simplified the study of
history for American audiences. There were enemies (them) and
us and our friends. There were truth tellers (American historians)
and there were liars (Soviet falsifiers). Best of all, there were no
sources because no American historian could use a Soviet
archive so it was very hard to challenge the view with evidence.
As a consequence – and often because many American historians
were either former politicians or wanted to become politicians – a
great American success story unfolded as Americans and
democracy were made to look very good indeed by their actions
towards an unreasonable enemy.
Interpretation B: British historian Joseph Smith, summarising
the Soviet view, 2001.
Soviet writers agreed on the importance of the Truman Doctrine in
contributing to the conflict between East and West. In their
opinion, American imperialism was the cause of the Cold War.
After the Truman Doctrine was enunciated, Soviet news agencies
criticised it as part of a calculated strategy to expand the capitalist
system throughout Europe. The Marshall Plan was similarly
condemned as an American plot to encircle the Soviet Union with
hostile capitalist states. In addition, the United States was accused
of endangering Soviet security by creating NATO and proceeding
to remilitarise West Germany.
Work in small groups. Five people per group would be ideal.
You are going to investigate who was to blame for the Cold War.
The possible verdicts you might reach are:
A  The USA was most to blame.
B  The USSR was most to blame.
C  Both sides were equally to blame.
D  No one was to blame. The Cold War was inevitable.
This is our suggested way of working.
1  Start by discussing the verdicts together. Is one more popular
than another in your group? You will probably find it helpful to
consider Interpretations A and B as well.
2  a)  Each member of the group should research how one of the
following factors helped to lead to the Cold War:
            –  the situation before the Second World War (pages 84–
85)
            –  the personal relationships between the various leaders
(pages 84–91)
            –  the conflicting beliefs of the superpowers (pages 84–85)
            –  the war damage suffered by the USSR (pages 86 and
90)
            –  Stalin’s take-over of eastern Europe (pages 90–91)
            –  Marshall Aid for Europe (pages 93–94)
            –  the Berlin Blockade (pages 95–96).
You can start with the page numbers given. You can
introduce your own research from other books or the internet
if you wish.
    b)  Present your evidence to your group and explain which, if
any, of the verdicts A–D your evidence most supports.
3  As a group, discuss which of the verdicts now seems most
sensible.
4  Write a balanced essay on who was to blame, explaining why
each verdict is a possibility but reaching your own conclusion
about which is best. The verdicts A–D give you a possible
structure for your essay. Write a paragraph on each verdict,
selecting relevant evidence for your group discussion. A final
paragraph can explain your overall conclusion.
Revision Tip
It is useful to think about big questions like ‘who was most to
blame…’ but it is also useful to think about the role of specific
factors so turn your research for question 2 of Focus Task 4.5 into
revision cards and share them with your fellow students.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Atomic bomb
•  Alliance
•  Appeasement
•  Berlin airlift
•  Berlin Blockade
•  Capitalism
•  Cominform
•  Communism
•  Democracy
•  Dictatorship
•  Iron curtain
•  Isolationism
•  Marshall Aid
•  Marshall Plan
•  NATO
•  Potsdam Conference
•  Soviet sphere of influence
•  Soviet Union
•  Superpower
•  Truman Doctrine
•  West/The Western Powers
•  Yalta Conference
Chapter Summary
The beginnings of the Cold War
  1  The USSR was a communist country with a ONE-PARTY STATE; the
USA was a capitalist democracy. They had very different ideas
about how a country should be run and had been enemies
throughout the 1930s. However, because they had a shared
enemy (Hitler) they were allies during the Second World War.
  2  When it was clear that Germany was going to be defeated their
leaders met together at Yalta (in the USSR) to plan what would
happen after the war. The US and Soviet leaders, Roosevelt
and Stalin, appeared to get on well, although behind the scenes
there were tensions and disagreements.
  3  They agreed that after the war Germany (and its capital Berlin)
would be divided into four sectors run by Britain, the USA,
France and the USSR, and that eastern Europe would be a
Soviet ‘sphere of influence’.
  4  After the war ended the countries met again at Potsdam in
Germany but by this time much had changed: Roosevelt had
been replaced as president by Truman; Stalin’s troops were
occupying most of eastern Europe; and the Americans had
dropped an atomic bomb.
  5  Relations between the USA and USSR quickly deteriorated and
a Cold War started (a Cold War is the threat of war and deep
mistrust but no outright fighting).
  6  All the countries of eastern Europe elected or had forced on
them a communist government that was allied to the USSR. The
division between communist east and capitalist west became
known as the iron curtain.
  7  The USA wanted to stop communism spreading – the Truman
Doctrine said that America would help any country that was
resisting outside pressure (by which Truman meant
communism). This marked a decisive end to US isolationism.
  8  The USA offered financial help (Marshall Aid) to countries in
western Europe to rebuild.
  9  The USSR saw Marshall Aid and the Truman Doctrine as a
threat to the USSR, which might lead to an attack on the USSR
itself.
10  Berlin became the first focus of Cold War tension when it was
blockaded by Stalin to prevent supplies getting into the
US/British/French sectors. The Western allies responded with
the Berlin airlift.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  What was agreed by the Allied leaders at the Yalta
Conference? [4]
    (b)  Why had relationships between the USA and the USSR
changed by the time of the Potsdam Conference? [6]
    (c)  ‘The Cold War was caused by the Soviet take-over of
eastern Europe.’ How far do you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer. [10]
2  Study Source 3 on page 86 and Source 7 on page 87. Why are
these sources so different? Explain your answer using the
sources and your knowledge. [7]
3  Study Source 15 on page 90. What is the message of the
cartoonist? Explain your answer. [7]
4  Explain why Source 26 (on page 96) is useful to historians
studying the origins of the Cold War. [8]
See pages 172–190 and 346–357 for advice on the different types
of questions you might face.
5 How effectively did the USA
contain the spread of
communism?
FOCUS POINTS
This key question will be explored through case studies of the
following:
•  the Korean War, 1950–53
•  the Cuban Missile Crisis of 1962
•  US involvement in the Vietnam War

This is the cover of a comic book published in the USA in
1947.
1  What impression does this comic cover give you of:
    a)  the USA?
    b)  communism?
2  What is the message of this picture?
Although the USA was the world’s most pow erful nation, in 1950 i t seemed
to President Truman that events were not going America’s way, particularly
with regard to COMMUNISM.
•  As you have seen in Chapter 4 most of eastern Europe had fallen under the
influence of the communist USSR 1945–48.
•  China became communist in 1949. The Americans had always regarded
China as their strongest ally in the Far East. Between 1946 a nd 1949 t hey
gave billions of dollars of aid to the Nationalist Government in China,
largely to prevent a communist take-over. That had failed. Suddenly a
massive new communist state had appeared on the map.
•  Also in 1949 t he Soviet leader STALIN announced that the USSR had
developed its own ATOMIC BOMB. The USA was no longer the world’s only
nuclear pow er.
•  Furthermore, American spies reported to President Truman that Stalin was
using his network (Cominform) to help communists win pow er in Malaya,
Indonesia, Burma, the Philippines and Korea. The USA had visions of the
communists overrunning all of Asia, with country after country being
toppled like a row of dom inoes.
There was already strong anticommunist feeling in the USA. These
developments made it stronger. There was no dou bt in the minds of American
leaders (indeed most American people) that this spread should be resisted. If
they could have done, they would have liked to turn back the communist
advances but that was unrealistic. So from 1947 on wards the USA followed
the policy of CONTAINMENT – holding back communism so it did not spread
any further. But as the 1950s  dawned this looked like a serious challenge.
In this chapter you will investigate:
•  the different methods the USA used to try to contain the spread of
communism
•  how successful these methods were during the Korean War, the Cuban
Missile Crisis and the Vietnam War – using the case studies to make up
your own mind.
Case study 1: The Korean War
Origins
Outbreak of the Korean War
Korea had been ruled by Japan until 1945. At the end of the Second World
War the northern half was liberated by Soviet troops  and the southern half by
Americans. When the war ended:
•  the North remained communist-controlled, with a communist leader who
had been trained in the USSR, and with a Soviet-style one-party system
•  the South was anticommunist. It was not very democratic, but the fact that
it was anticommunist was enough to win it the support of the USA.
There was bitter hostility between the North’s communist leader, Kim Il
Sung, and Syngman Rhee, president of South Korea. REUNIFICATION did not
seem likely. In 1950 t his hostility spilled ove r into ope n warfare. North
Korean troops  overwhelmed the South’s forces. By September 1950 a ll
except a small corner of south-east Korea was under communist control (see
Figure 5, map 1).
Think!
The situation in Korea has sometimes been compared to the
situation in Germany in 1945 (which you studied in Chapter 4).
Explain:
a)  how these situations were similar
b)  how they were different.
The US response
As you have already seen in Chapter 4, US President Truman was determined
to contain communism – to stop it spreading further. In his view, Korea was a
glaring example of how communism would spread if the USA did nothing
(see Source 1). Containment was the aim, but there were different ways to
achieve this aim. Truman’s attitude was that the USA would do a nything
(short of all-out war) to stop the spread of communism.
President Truman immediately sent advisers, supplies and warships to the
seas around Korea. However, he was aware that if he was going to take
military action it would look better to the rest of the world if he had the
support of other countries, especially if he had the support of the UNITED
NATIONS. In fact, the ideal situation would be a UN intervention in the
Korean War rather than an American one.
SOURCE 1
Korea is a symbol to the watching world. If we allow Korea to fall
within the Soviet orbit, the world will feel we have lost another
round in our match with the Soviet Union, and our prestige and the
hopes of those who place their faith in us will suffer accordingly.
The US State Department, 1950.
United Nations Resolution 84
Truman put enormous pressure on the UN Security Council to condemn the
actions of the North Koreans and to call on them to withdraw their troops .
The USA was the biggest single contributor to the UN BUDGET and was
therefore in a pow erful position to influence its decisions. However, this did
not mean the USA always got its own way and it would probably have failed
this time except for some unusual circumstances.
In the Cold War atmosphere of 1950, e ach SUPERPOWER always denounced
and oppos ed the other. Normally, in a dispute such as this, the SOVIET UNION
would have used its right of veto to block the call for action by the UN.
However, the USSR was BOYCOTTING the UN at this time over another issue
(whether communist China should be allowed to join the UN). So when the
resolution was passed, the USSR was not even at the meeting so could not
use its veto. So Truman was able to claim that this was a UN-sponsored
operation, even if Soviet newspapers and other media claimed that the
decision was not valid.
Under the resolution (see Source 2) the UN committed itself to using its
members’ armies to drive North Korean troops  out of South Korea. Eighteen
states provided troops  or support of some kind. These were mostly allies of
the USA and included Britain. However, by far the largest part of the UN
force was American. The commander, General MacArthur, was also
American.
SOURCE 2
The UN will render such assistance to the republic of Korea as may
be necessary to restore international peace and security to the
area.
Resolution 84 passed by the United Nations
in 1950.
SOURCE 3
If the UN is ever going to do anything, this is the time, and if the UN
cannot bring the crisis in Korea to an end then we might as well just
wash up the United Nations and forget it.
American Senator Tom Connally speaking in
1950. He was a Republican and strongly
anticommunist.
Development
September 1950 – the UN force advances
United Nations forces stormed ashore at Inchon in September 1950 ( see
Figure 5, map 2). At the same time, other UN forces and South Korean troops
advanced from Pusan. The North Koreans were driven back beyond their
original border (the 38th parallel) within weeks.
SOURCE 4
A cartoon by David Low, 1950.
Source Analysis
Source 4 makes a comparison with earlier events you may have
studied in this book – see Chapter 2. Use that knowledge to write a
100-word explanation of the message of this cartoon for someone
who does not know anything about the League of Nations.
FIGURE 5
The Korean War, 1950–53.
October 1950 – the UN force presses on
MacArthur had quickly achieved the original UN aim of removing North
Korean troops  from South Korea. But the Americans did not stop. Despite
warnings from China’s leader, Mao Tse-tung, that if they pressed on China
would join the war, the UN approved a plan to advance into North Korea.
By October, US forces had reached the Yalu River and the border with China
(see Figure 5, map 2). The nature of the war had now changed. It was clear
that MacArthur and Truman were after a bigger prize, one which went
beyond containment. As the UN forces advanced and secured their positions
(see Source 6), Truman and MacArthur saw an oppor tunity to remove
communism from Korea entirely. Even Mao’s warnings were not going to put
them off.
SOURCE 6
Had they [the Chinese] intervened in the first or second months it
would have been decisive, [but] we are no longer fearful of their
intervention. Now that we have bases for our Air Force in Korea,
there would be the greatest slaughter.
General MacArthur speaking in October
1950.
November 1950 – the UN force retreats
MacArthur underestimated the pow er of the Chinese. Late in October 1950,
200,000 C hinese troops  (calling themselves ‘People’s Volunteers’) joined
the North Koreans. They launched a blistering attack. They had soldiers who
were strongly committed to communism and had been taught by their leader
to hate the Americans. They had modern tanks and planes supplied by the
Soviet Union. The United Nations forces were pushed back into South Korea.
Conditions were some of the worst the American forces had known, with
treacherous cold and blinding snowstorms in the winter of 1950–51. The
Chinese forces were more familiar with fighting in the jagged mountains,
forested ravines and treacherous swamps – as the landscape was similar to
many areas of China.
April 1951 – MacArthur is sacked
At this point, Truman and MacArthur fell out. MacArthur wanted to carry on
the war. He was ready to invade China and even use nuclear weapons if
necessary. Truman, on the other hand, felt that saving South Korea was good
enough. Communism had been contained. The risks of starting a war that
might bring in the USSR were too great, and so an attack on China was ruled
out.
However, in March 1951 M acArthur blatantly ignored the UN instruction and
openly threatened an attack on China. In April Truman removed MacArthur
from his position as commander and brought him back home. He rejected
MacArthur’s aggressive policy towards communism. Containment was
underlined as the American policy. One of the American army leaders,
General Omar Bradley, said that MacArthur’s approach would have
‘involved America in the wrong war, in the wrong place, at the wrong time,
and with the wrong enemy’. Truman agreed with Bradley and was effectively
returning to the policy of containment and accepting that he could not drive
the communists out of North Korea.
June 1951 – peace talks begin
The fighting finally reached stalemate around the 38th parallel (see Figure 5,
map 4) in the middle of 1951. Peace talks between North and South Korea
began in June 1951, a lthough bitter fighting continued for two more years.
July 1953 – armistice
In 1952 T ruman was replaced by President Eisenhower, who wanted to end
the war. Stalin’s death in March 1953 m ade the Chinese and North Koreans
less confident. An ARMISTICE was finally signed in July 1953. The border
between North and South Korea was much the same as it had been before
war started in 1950.
Profile
General Douglas MacArthur (1880–1964)
•  Born 1880. His father was a successful army leader.
•  Trained at West Point, the top American military academy.
•  Fought in the First World War. Became the youngest commander
in the American army in France. Received 13 medals for bravery.
•  During the Second World War he was the commander of the war
against the Japanese. He devised the ‘island-hopping’ strategy
that allowed the Americans to defeat the Japanese.
•  In 1945 he personally accepted the Japanese surrender, and
from 1945 to 1951 he virtually controlled Japan, helping the
shattered country get back on its feet.
•  He was aged 70 when he was given command of the UN forces
in Korea.
•  He tried unsuccessfully to run for US president in 1952.
Think!
Use the text on pages 103–104 to write some extra bullet points
for the Profile describing:
a)  MacArthur’s personality and beliefs
b)  his actions in Korea.
SOURCE 7
Even the reports to the UN were censored by [American] state and
defence departments. I had no connection with the United Nations
whatsoever.
From General MacArthur’s memoirs.
Consequences of the Korean War
The casualties on all sides were enormous – bu t particularly among civilians
(see Figure 8 and Source 9).
FIGURE 8
Civilian and military deaths in the Korean War.
American military deaths per year of conflict
were actually higher than the Vietnam War.
SOURCE 9
Civilian casualty in the early stages of the
Korean War as South Koreans fled from the
advancing North Koreans.
A success for containment?
In one sense the Korean War was a success for the USA. The cost and the
casualties were high but it showed that the USA had the will and the means to
contain communism. South Korea remained out of communist hands.
On the other hand it showed the limits of the policy. The USA had to accept
that North Korea remained communist. It also highlighted tensions among
American leaders. Hardline anticommunist politicians and military leaders
wanted to go beyond containment – to push back communism. They thought
that Truman had shown weakness in not going for outright victory. More
moderate politicians and commanders argued that this would not be worth the
risk.
These tensions would affect US policy over the coming decades, and North
Korea would continue to trouble the USA long after the Cold War ended.
With support from China, North Korea developed into a hardline communist
DICTATORSHIP and eventually became a nuclear pow er, threatening the USA’s
allies Japan and South Korea.
FOCUS TASK 5.1
Was the Korean War a success for containment?
Draw up your own copy of this table. You will use it to compare the
three case studies. At this stage, just focus on the Korean War.
You are going to revisit this task at the end of the Cuban Missile
Crisis and the Vietnam War as well. We have started it off for you.
Your completed chart will be a useful revision tool.
Methods of containment
There was no dou bt at all in the minds of American leaders that communism
had to be resisted. The question was how to do i t. The Korean War showed
the Americans that they could not just send their soldiers to fight a war
whenever they saw a problem (see Source 10). It was too expensive and it
did not really work very well. Instead American policy focused on two other
methods of containment: building ALLIANCES and developing ever more
powerful weapons.
SOURCE 10
We shall never have a secure peace and a happy world so long as
Soviet Communism dominates one-third of all the world’s people
and is in the process of trying to extend its rule to many others.
Therefore we must have in mind the liberation of these captive
peoples. Now liberation does not mean war. Liberation can be
achieved by processes short of war.
J.F. Dulles, US Secretary of State, speaking
on his appointment in 1952.
Alliances with anticommunist countries
The USA created a network of anticommunist alliances around the world:
SEATO in South East Asia and CENTO in Central Asia and the Middle East.
The USA gave money, advice and arms to these allies. In return, the leaders
of these countries suppressed communist influence in their own countries.
The USSR saw these alliances as aggressive. They accused the USA of
trying to encircle the communist world. In 1955 t he Soviet Union set up the
Warsaw Treaty Organisation, better known as the WARSAW PACT. This
included the USSR and all the communist east European countries except
Yugoslavia (see Figure 11).
FIGURE 11
Membership of the organisations allied to the
USA and USSR in 1955.
Building more powerful nuclear weapons
The Americans had developed their first atomic bom b in 1945. They did not
share the secret of their bom b with the USSR, even while they were still
allies. When the USA droppe d the first bom bs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki in
August 1945, 70,000 pe ople were killed instantly. The awesome pow er of
the explosions and the incredible destruction caused by the bom bs made
Japan surrender within a week. It was clear to the USA that atomic bom bs
were the weapons of the future. Just threatening to use such weapons could
help contain communism.
The same was clear to the USSR! The result was an ARMS RACE to build ever
more pow erful weapons and to place them where they could best threaten
your enemy. This was to prove a key factor in our next case study: the Cuban
Missile Crisis.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember:
•  one example of the USA creating an alliance to contain
communism
•  one example of it using the threat of nuclear weapons to try to
contain communism.
Case study 2: The Cuban Missile
Crisis
For many historians – and people at the time – the Cuban Missile Crisis was
the most serious incident in the Cold War. To understand why, we need to
look closely at Cold War tensions at the time and particularly the nuclear
‘arms race’.
Origins of the Cuban Missile Crisis
The arms race and nuclear deterrence
Through the 1960s  the USA and the USSR were locked in a nuclear arms
race. Each side developed ever bigger, more deadly and more flexible
weapons. They both spent vast amounts of money on new weapons.
They spied on one another to steal technological secrets. The USSR tended to
use spies. The USA favoured hi-tech spying such as the U2 plane – a plane
which flew so high it could not be shot dow n but took incredibly detailed
photos of the ground. It could read a newspaper from 14 m iles up in the sky!
Each side perfected nuclear bom bs that could be launched from submarines
or planes. The USA placed short-range nuclear weapons in Turkey (one of
their CENTO allies). Both sides developed ICBMs, which could travel from
continent to continent in half an hour.
By the early 1960s  both sides had enough nuclear weapons to destroy the
other side. The USA had more than the USSR, but the advantage did not
really matter because both sides had enough to destroy each other many times
over. On each side the theory was that such weapons made them more secure.
The ‘NUCLEAR DETERRENT’ meant the enemy would not dare attack first,
because it knew that, if it did, the other would strike back before its bom bs
had even landed and it too w ould be destroyed. This policy also became
known as MAD (Mutually Assured Destruction). Surely no side would dare
strike first when it knew the attack would destroy itself too.
The Cuban Revolution
Cuba is a large island just 160 k m from Florida in the southern USA. It had
long been an American ally. Americans owned most of the businesses on the
island and they had a huge naval base there (see Figure 18 on page 110). The
Americans also provided the Cuban ruler, General Batista, with economic
and military support. Batista was a DICTATOR. His rule was corrupt and
unpopu lar. The Americans supported Batista primarily because he was just
as oppos ed to communism as they were.
SOURCE 12
We considered it part of the United States practically, just a
wonderful little country over there that was of no danger to
anybody, as a matter of fact it was a rather important economic
asset to the United States.
American TV reporter Walter Cronkite.
SOURCE 13
I believe there is no country in the world … whose economic
colonisation, humiliation and exploitation were worse than in Cuba,
partly as a consequence of US policy during the Batista regime. I
believe that, without being aware of it, we conceived and created
the Castro movement, starting from scratch.
President Kennedy speaking in 1963.
Source Analysis
How far do Sources 12 and 13 agree about Cuba’s relationship with
the USA before the revolution?
Enter Fidel Castro
There was plenty of oppos ition to Batista in Cuba itself. In 1959, a fter a
three-year campaign, Fidel Castro ove rthrew Batista. Castro was charming,
clever and also ruthless. He quickly killed, arrested or exiled many political
oppon ents. Castro was also a clever propagandist. He was very charismatic
and he had a vision for a better Cuba, which won over the majority of
Cubans.
The USA was taken by surprise at first and decided to recognise Castro as
the new leader of Cuba. However, within a short period of  time relations
between the two countries grew worse. There were two important reasons:
•  There were thousands of Cuban exiles in the USA who had fled from
Castro’s rule. They formed pow erful pressure groups demanding action
against Castro.
•  Castro took over some American-owned businesses in Cuba, particularly
agricultural businesses. He took their land and distributed it to his
supporters among Cuba’s PEASANT farmer popu lation.
The USA responds
As early as June 1960, U S President Eisenhower authorised the US Central
Intelligence Agency (CIA) to investigate ways of overthrowing Castro. The
CIA provided support and funds to Cuban exiles. It also investigated ways to
disrupt the Cuban economy, such as damaging sugar plantations. American
companies working in Cuba refused to co-operate with any Cuban businesses
that used oil or other materials which had been imported from the USSR. The
American media also broadcast a relentless stream of criticism of Castro and
his regime (see Source 15 for example).
Castro responded to US hostility with a mixed approach. He assured
Americans living in Cuba that they were safe and he allowed the USA to
keep its naval base. He said he simply wanted to run Cuba without
interference. However, by the summer of 1960 h e had allied Cuba with the
Soviet Union. Soviet leader Khrushchev signed a trade agreement giving
Cuba $100 m illion in economic aid. Castro also began receiving arms from
the Soviet Union and American spies knew this.
SOURCE 14
A 1960 Soviet cartoon. The notice held by the
US Secretary of State says to Castro in
Cuba: ‘I forbid you to make friends with the
Soviet Union.’
Source Analysis
1  Apart from the caption in Russian, how else can you tell that the
cartoon in Source 14 is a Soviet cartoon?
2  What is the cartoonist’s view of the situation?
‘The Bay of Pigs’ invasion
In January 1961 t he USA’s new president, John F Kennedy, broke off
DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS with Cuba. Castro thought that the USA was preparing
to invade his country. He was right. Kennedy was no longer prepared to
tolerate a Soviet satellite in the USA’s ‘sphere of influence’. However, the
Americans did not want to invade directly. Instead President Kennedy put
into action a plan that had been devised under Eisenhower. He supplied
arms, equipment and transport for 1400 a nti-Castro exiles to invade Cuba
intending to ove rthrow Castro.
In April 1961 t he exiles landed at the BAY OF PIGS (see Factfile). The
invasion failed disastrously. They were met by 20,000 C uban troops , armed
with tanks and modern weapons. Castro captured or killed them all within
days.
Factfile
Bay of Pigs invasion
•  Cuban exiles were funded and trained by the CIA and supported
by US air power.
•  The plan was originally devised by President Eisenhower’s
Government but Kennedy approved it when he became
president. Training began in April 1960. The invasion took place
on 17 April 1961
•  Cuban security services knew that the invasion was coming.
•  The invasion was a complete failure. US INTELLIGENCE, which
stated that Cuban people would rebel against Castro, proved to
be wrong.
Kennedy ordered extensive investigations into the disaster. Key
failings were identified:
•  lack of secrecy so that USA could not deny its involvement
•  poor links between various US departments
•  failure to organise resistance inside Cuba
•  insufficient Spanish-speaking staff.
The impact of the invasion
The half-hearted invasion suggested to Cuba and the Soviet Union that,
despite its oppos ition to communism in Cuba, the USA was unwilling to get
directly involved in Cuba. The Soviet leader Khrushchev was scornful of
Kennedy’s pathetic attempt to oust communism from Cuba.
Historians too argue that the Bay of Pigs fiasco further strengthened Castro’s
position in Cuba. It suggested to the USSR that Kennedy was weak (see
Source 16). It also made Castro and Khrushchev very suspicious of US
policy.
SOURCE 15
By October 1962 the historic friendship between Cuba and the USA
was gone. Behind this change was the story of the betrayal of the
Cuban people. It began with Fidel Castro triumphantly entering
Havana in 1959. Castro promised democracy and freedom and for
a time it appeared to most Cubans that they were liberated. But it
soon became apparent that Castro had sold out to Premier
Khrushchev of the Communists.
Commentary from an American TV
programme made in 1962.
SOURCE 16
I think he [Khrushchev] did it [was so aggressive in the meeting]
because of the Bay of Pigs. He thought that anyone who was so
young and inexperienced as to get into that mess could be beaten;
and anyone who got into it and didn’t see it through had no guts. So
he just beat the hell out of me.
If he thinks I’m inexperienced and have no guts, until we remove
those ideas we won’t get anywhere with him.
Kennedy speaking after a meeting with
Khrushchev in 1961.
FOCUS TASK 5.2
How did the USA respond to the Cuban revolution?
1  The President has asked his advisers how he should deal with
Cuba. Here are some suggestions they might have made:
Record examples you can find of the USA doing any of these
things. If you find examples of American actions that are not
covered by these words record them too.
2  Place these actions on a ‘containment continuum’ like this:
Revision Tip
From these two pages you should make sure you remember:
•  one reason why the USA disliked Castro’s Government
•  how the USA initially tried to contain communism on Cuba.
The October crisis
Khrushchev arms Castro
After the Bay of Pigs fiasco, Soviet arms floode d into Cuba. In May 1962 t he
Soviet Union announced publicly for the first time that it was supplying Cuba
with arms. By July 1962 C uba had the best-equipped army in Latin America.
By September it had thousands of Soviet missiles, plus patrol boats, tanks,
radar vans, missile erectors, jet bom bers, jet fighters and 5000 S oviet
technicians to help maintain the weapons.
SOURCE 17
[Estimates were that the] missiles had an atomic warhead [power]
of about half the current missile capacity of the entire Soviet Union.
The photographs indicated that missiles were directed at certain
American cities. The estimate was that within a few minutes of their
being fired 80 million Americans would be dead.
President Kennedy’s brother, Robert
Kennedy, describing events on Thursday 18
October in the book he wrote about the
crisis, 13 Days.
The Americans watched all this with great alarm. They seemed ready to
tolerate conventional arms being supplied to Cuba, but the big question was
whether the Soviet Union would dare to put nuclear missiles on Cuba. In
September Kennedy’s own Intelligence Department said that it did not
believe the USSR would send nuclear weapons to Cuba. The USSR had not
taken this step with any of its SATELLITE STATES before and the US Intelligence
Department believed that the USSR would consider it too risky to do i t in
Cuba. On 11 September, Kennedy warned the USSR that he would prevent
‘by whatever means might be necessary’ Cuba becoming an offensive
military base – by  which, everyone knew, he meant a base for nuclear
missiles. The same day the USSR assured the USA that it had no need to put
nuclear missiles on Cuba and no intention of doing so.
The US discovers nuclear sites
On Sunday, 14 O ctober 1962, a n American spy plane flew over Cuba. It took
amazingly detailed photographs of missile sites in Cuba. Despite the USSR’s
reassurances that they did not intend to provide nuclear missiles to Cuba, to
the military experts two things were obvi ous: these were nuclear missile
sites, and they were being built by the USSR.
More photo reconnaissance followed ove r the next two days. This confirmed
that some sites were nearly finished but others were still being built. Some
were already supplied with missiles, others were awaiting them. The experts
said that the most developed of the sites could be ready to launch missiles in
just seven days. American spy planes also reported that twenty Soviet ships
were currently on the way to Cuba carrying missiles.
FIGURE 18
Map showing the location of Cuba and the
range of the Cuban missiles.
ACTIVITY
How should President Kennedy deal with the Cuban crisis?
On Tuesday 16 October, President Kennedy was informed of the
discovery. He formed a special team of advisers called Ex Comm.
They came up with several choices.
Work in groups. You are advisers to the President. You have to
reduce Ex Comm’s five options to just two for the President to
choose between. When you have made your decision explain why
you have rejected the three you have.
Option 1 Do nothing?
For: The Americans still had a vastly greater nuclear power
than the Soviet Union. The USA could still destroy the
Soviet Union, so – the argument went – the USSR would
never use these missiles. The biggest danger to world
peace would be to overreact to this discovery.
Against:The USSR had lied about Cuban missiles. Kennedy had
already issued his solemn warning to the USSR. To do
nothing would be another sign of weakness.
Option 2 Surgical air attack?
An immediate selected air attack to destroy the nuclear bases
themselves.
For: It would destroy the missiles before they were ready to
use.
Against:1  Destruction of all sites could not be guaranteed. Even
one left undamaged could launch a counter-attack
against the USA.
2  The attack would inevitably kill Soviet soldiers. The
Soviet Union might retaliate at once.
3  To attack without advance warning was seen as
immoral.
Option 3 Invasion?
All-out invasion of Cuba by air and sea.
For: An invasion would not only get rid of the missiles but
Castro as well. The American forces were already
trained and available to do it.
Against:It would almost certainly guarantee an equivalent Soviet
response, either to protect Cuba, or within the SOVIET
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE – for example, a take-over of Berlin.
Option 4 Diplomatic pressures?
To get the United Nations or other body to intervene and
negotiate.
For: It would avoid conflict.
Against:If the USA was forced to back down, it would be a sign
of weakness.
Option 5 Blockade?
A ban on the Soviet Union bringing in any further military supplies
to Cuba, enforced by the US navy who would stop and search
Soviet ships. And a call for the Soviet Union to withdraw what
was already there.
For: It would show that the USA was serious, but it would
not be a direct act of war. It would put the burden on
Khrushchev to decide what to do next. The USA had a
strong navy and could still take the other options if this
one did not work.
Against:It would not solve the main problem – the missiles were
already on Cuba. They could be used within one week.
The Soviet Union might retaliate by blockading Berlin as
it had done in 1948.
What happened next?
Tue 16 O ctober
President Kennedy was informed of the missile build-up. Ex Comm
formed.
Sat 20 O ctober
Kennedy decided on a BLOCKADE of Cuba.
Mon 22 O ctober
Kennedy announced the blockade and called on the Soviet Union to
withdraw its missiles. He addressed the American people:
SOURCE 19
Good Evening, My Fellow Citizens:
Within the past week, unmistakable evidence has established the
fact that a series of offensive missile sites is now in preparation on
Cuba.
… Acting, therefore, in the defence of our own security and of the
entire Western Hemisphere, and under the authority entrusted to
me by the Constitution, I have directed that the following initial
steps be taken immediately:
First: a strict quarantine on all offensive military equipment under
shipment to Cuba … Second: continued and increased close
SURVEILLANCE of Cuba … Third: we will regard any nuclear missile
launched from Cuba against any nation in the Western Hemisphere
as an attack on the United States, requiring a full retaliatory
response upon the Soviet Union.
Extract from President Kennedy’s TV
broadcast to the American people on 22
October 1962.
Source Analysis
1  What words and phrases in Source 19 reveal how serious
Kennedy believed the situation was in October 1962?
2  Kennedy was renowned as a skilled communicator. How did he
convince his audience that he was in the right?
Tue 23 O ctober
Kennedy received a letter from Khrushchev saying that Soviet ships would
not observe the blockade. Khrushchev did not admit the presence of nuclear
missiles on Cuba.
Wed 24 O ctober
The blockade began. The first missile-carrying ships, accompanied by a
Soviet submarine, approached the 500- mile (800-km) blockade zone. Then
suddenly, at 10.32 a .m., the twenty Soviet ships which were closest to the
zone stoppe d or turned around.
SOURCE 20
A cartoon by Vicky (Victor Weisz) from the
London Evening Standard, 24 October 1962.
Source Analysis
1  Source 20 is a British cartoon. Pretend you did not know this.
Explain why it is unlikely to be an American or Soviet cartoon.
2  What is its attitude to the two sides in the crisis?
Thu 25 O ctober
Despite the Soviet ships turning around, intensive aerial photography
revealed that work on the missile bases in Cuba was proceeding rapidly.
Fri 26 O ctober
Kennedy received a long personal letter from Khrushchev. The letter
claimed that the missiles on Cuba were purely defensive, but went on: ‘If
assurances were given that the USA would not participate in an attack on
Cuba and the blockade was lifted, then the question of the removal or the
destruction of the missile sites would be an entirely different question.’ This
was the first time Khrushchev had admitted the presence of the missiles.
Sat 27 O ctober a.m.
Khrushchev sent a second letter – revising his propos als – saying that the
condition for removing the missiles from Cuba was that the USA withdraw
its missiles from Turkey.
An American U-2 plane was shot down over Cuba. The pilot was killed.
The President was advised to launch an immediate reprisal attack on Cuba.
Sat 27 O ctober p.m.
Kennedy decided to delay an attack. He also decided to ignore the second
Khrushchev letter, but accepted the terms suggested by Khrushchev on 26
October. He said that if the Soviet Union did not withdraw, an attack would
follow.
SOURCE 21
It was a beautiful autumn evening, the height of the crisis, and I
went up to the open air to smell it, because I thought it was the last
Saturday I would ever see.
Robert McNamara talking about the evening
of 27 October 1962. McNamara was one of
Kennedy’s closest advisers during the Cuban
Crisis.
Sun 28 O ctober
Khrushchev replied to Kennedy: ‘In order to eliminate as rapidly as
possible the conflict which endangers the cause of peace … the Soviet
Government has given a new order to dismantle the arms which you
described as offensive and to crate and return them to the Soviet Union.’
SOURCE 22
A cartoon from the British newspaper, the
Daily Mail.
Source Analysis
1  Does Source 22 give the impression that either Khrushchev or
Kennedy has the upper hand?
2  Explain whether you think the events of the crisis on these pages
support that view.
Think!
Kennedy described Wednesday 24 October and Saturday 27
October as the darkest days of the crisis. Use the information on
these pages to explain why.
Why did the Soviet Union place
nuclear missiles on Cuba?
It was an incredibly risky strategy. The USSR had supplied many of its allies
with CONVENTIONAL WEAPONS but this was the first time that any Soviet
leader had placed nuclear weapons outside Soviet territory. Why did
Khrushchev take such an unusual step? He must have known that it would
cause a crisis. What’s more, the Soviets and Cubans made no attempt at all to
camouflage the sites, and even allowed the missiles to travel on open deck.
This has caused much debate as to what Khrushchev was really doing.
Historians have suggested various possible explanations.
To bargain with the USA
If Khrushchev had missiles on Cuba, he could agree to remove them in return
for some American concessions.
To test the USA
In the strained atmosphere of Cold War politics the missiles were designed
to see how strong the Americans really were – whether they would back off
or face up.
To trap the USA
Khrushchev wanted the Americans to find them and be drawn into a nuclear
war. He did not even try to hide them.

To close the missile gap
Khrushchev was so concerned about the MISSILE GAP between the USSR and
the USA that he would seize any oppor tunity he could to close it. With
missiles on Cuba it was less likely that the USA would ever launch a ‘first
strike’ against the USSR.
To defend Cuba
Cuba was the only communist state in the Western Hemisphere, and it had
willingly become communist rather than having become communist as a
result of invasion by the USSR. In addition, Cuba was in ‘Uncle Sam’s
backyard’. As Castro himself put it: ‘The imperialist cannot forgive that we
have made a socialist revolution under the nose of the United States.’ Just by
existing, Castro’s Cuba was excellent PROPAGANDA for the USSR.
To strengthen his own position in the USSR
The superiority of the USA in nuclear missiles undermined Khrushchev’s
credibility inside the USSR. His critics pointed out that he was the one who
had urged the USSR to rely on nuclear missiles. Now, could he show that the
USSR really was a nuclear pow er?
SOURCE 23
From the territory of the Soviet Union, the medium-range missiles
couldn’t possibly reach the territory of the USA, but deployed on
Cuba they would become strategic nuclear weapons. That meant in
practical terms we had a chance to narrow the differences between
our forces.
General Anatoly Gribkov, commander, Soviet
forces, Cuba.
SOURCE 24
In addition to protecting Cuba, our missiles would have equalized
what the West likes to call the ‘balance of power’. The Americans
had surrounded our country with military bases and threatened us
with nuclear weapons, and now they would learn just what it feels
like to have enemy missiles pointing at you …
Khrushchev writing in his memoirs in 1971.
Think!
1  Which of the explanations above do Sources 23 and 24 support?
2  Talking in private Khrushchev called the missiles ‘a hedgehog in
Uncle Sam’s pants’. Which of the explanations does this
statement support?
3  Which explanation do you think Khrushchev’s actions on 26 and
27 October support (see page 113)?
4  Choose the explanation(s) that you think best fits what you have
found out about the crisis. Explain your choice.
Outcomes of the Cuban Missile
Crisis…
…for Kennedy and the USA
•  Kennedy came out of the crisis with a greatly improved
reputation in his own country and throughout the West. He had
stood up to Khrushchev and made him back down.
•  Kennedy had also resisted the hardliners in his own Government.
They had wanted the USA to invade Cuba – to turn back
communism. However, the crisis highlighted the weakness of
their case. Such intervention was not worth the high risk.
•  On the other hand, he did secretly agree to remove the missiles
from Turkey. This was awkward for him as the decision to
remove them should have been a decision for NATO. His NATO
allies were unhappy that Kennedy had traded them during the
crisis but accepted this was better than a nuclear war.
•  Kennedy also had to accept that Castro’s Cuba would remain a
communist state in America’s backyard.
…for Khrushchev and the USSR
•  In public Khrushchev was able to highlight his role as a
responsible peacemaker, willing to make the first move towards
compromise.
•  There was no question that keeping Cuba safe from American
attack was a major achievement for the USSR. Cuba was a
valuable ally and proved a useful base from which to support
communists in South America.
•  Khrushchev did also get the USA to withdraw its nuclear missiles
from Turkey. However, Khrushchev promised to keep this secret
so he was unable to use it for propaganda purposes.
•  The USA was criticised by some of its own allies. Newspaper
articles in Britain, for example, commented that the USA was
unreasonable to have missiles in Turkey and yet object to Soviet
missiles in Cuba.
•  On the other hand, Khrushchev had been forced to back down
and remove the missiles. Soviet military leaders were particularly
upset at the terms of the withdrawal. They were forced to put
missiles on the decks of their ships so the Americans could count
them. They felt this was a humiliation.
•  The USSR still lagged behind the USA in the arms race. The
USSR developed its stockpile of ICBMs at a huge financial cost,
but it never caught up with the USA.
•  In 1964 Khrushchev himself was forced from power by his
enemies inside the USSR. Many commentators believe that the
Cuban Missile Crisis contributed to this.
…for the Cold War
•  The crisis helped thaw Cold War relations between the USA and
the USSR. Both leaders had seen how their brinkmanship had
nearly ended in nuclear war. They were now more prepared to
take steps to reduce the risk of nuclear war. For example:
    •  A permanent ‘hot line’ phone link was set up direct from the
White House to the Kremlin.
    •  In 1963, they signed a Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. It did not stop
the development of weapons, but it limited tests and was an
important step forward.
•  Although it was clear the USSR could not match US technology
or numbers of weapons, it was also clear this was not
necessary. The Soviet nuclear arsenal was enough of a threat to
make the USA respect the USSR. It is significant that for the rest
of the Cold War the superpowers avoided direct confrontation
and fought through their allies where possible.
…for Castro’s Cuba
•  Castro was very upset by Khrushchev’s deal with America but he
had to accept it. He needed the support of the USSR.
•  Cuba stayed communist and highly armed. The nuclear missiles
were removed but Cuba remained an important base for
communist operations in South America and for a CIVIL WAR in
Angola in the 1970s.
•  Castro kept control of the American companies and economic
resources he nationalised during his revolution.
Think!
1  Use the information on this page to fill out a table of positive and
negative outcomes for the USA and the USSR.
2  Who do you think gained the most from the Cuban Missile
Crisis?
FOCUS TASK 5.3
Was the Cuban Missile Crisis a success for containment?
Look back at your table from page 105. Complete a second row
for the Cuban Missile Crisis.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember from this case study:
•  one reason that the Cuban Crisis might be seen as a success for
containment
•  one reason it might be seen as a failure.
Case study 3: The Vietnam War
Although Americans were relieved at the outcome of the Cuban Crisis it did
not reduce their fear of communism. Very soon they found themselves locked
in a costly war in Vietnam, which put a massive question mark over the very
policy of containment.
Origins of the Vietnam War
Vietnam had a long history of fighting outsiders.
Fighting the Japanese
Before the Second World War, Vietnam (or INDOCHINA as it was called then)
had been ruled by France. During the war the region was conquered by the
Japanese. They treated the Vietnamese people savagely. As a result, a strong
anti-Japanese resistance movement (the Viet Minh) emerged under the
leadership of communist Ho Chi Minh.
Ho inspired the Vietnamese people to fight the Japanese. When the Second
World War ended, the Viet Minh entered the northern city of Hanoi in 1945
and declared Vietnam independent.
Fighting the French
The French had other ideas. In 1945 t hey came back wanting to rule Vietnam
again, but Ho was not prepared to let this happen. Another nine years of war
followed between the Viet Minh, who controlled the north of the country, and
the French, who controlled much of the south.
From 1949 H o was supported by China, which had become a communist
state in 1949. As we have seen in the Cold War, the USA responded by
helping those who oppos ed the communists. It poured $500 m illion a year
into the French war effort. Despite this the French were unable to hold on to
the country and pulled out of Vietnam in 1954.
A peace conference was held in Geneva and the country was divided into
North and South Vietnam until elections could be held to decide its future
(see Source 25).
SOURCE 25
It was generally agreed that had an election been held, Ho Chi
Minh would have been elected Premier … at the time of the
fighting, possibly 80 per cent of the population would have voted
for the communist Ho Chi Minh as their leader.
President Eisenhower writing after the
Vietnam War.
SOURCE 26
Quang Duc, a 73-year-old Buddhist priest,
burns himself to death in protest against the
attacks on Buddhist shrines by the
Government of South Vietnam in 1963.
The USA responds
Under the terms of the ceasefire, elections were to be held within two years
to reunite the country. You will remember how the USA criticised Stalin for
not holding free elections in Soviet-controlled eastern Europe after the war
(see pages 88–91). In Vietnam in 1954 t he USA applied a different rule. It
prevented the elections from taking place.
Why did the Americans do this? Their policy was a strange combination of
determination and ignorance. President Eisenhower and his Secretary of
State JF Dulles were convinced that China and the USSR were planning to
spread communism throughout Asia. The idea was often referred to as the
DOMINO THEORY. If Vietnam fell to communism, then Laos, Cambodia,
Thailand, Burma and pos sibly even India might also fall – just like a row of
dominoes. The Americans were determined to resist the spread of
communism in Vietnam, which they saw as the first dom ino in the row.
However, their methods and pol icies showed their ignorance of the
Vietnamese people and the region.
Financial support for Diem’s regime
In 1955 t he Americans helped Ngo Dinh Diem to set up the Republic of
South Vietnam. They supported him because he was bitterly anticommunist.
However, Diem’s regime was very unpopu lar with the Vietnamese people.
•  He belonged to the LANDLORD class, which treated the Vietnamese
PEASANTS with contempt.
•  He was a Christian and showed little respect for the Buddhist religion of
most Vietnamese peasants (see Source 26).
•  Diem’s regime was also extremely corrupt.
The Americans were concerned and frustrated by his actions, but as Dulles
said, ‘We knew of no one better.’ The USA supported Diem’s regime with
around $1.6 bi llion in the 1950s . Diem was overthrown by his own army
leaders in November 1963, bu t the governments that followed were equally
corrupt. Even so, they also received massive US support.
Think!
1  Many neutral observers in Vietnam were critical of US policy
towards Diem’s regime. Explain why.
2  Explain how US politicians would have defended their policies.
The emergence of the Viet Cong
The actions of these anticommunist governments increased support among the
ordinary peasants for the communist-led National Front for the Liberation of
South Vietnam, which was set up in December 1960. This movement was
usually called the VIET CONG. It included South Vietnamese oppon ents of the
Government, but also large numbers of communist North Vietnamese taking
their orders from Ho Chi Minh. Peasants who did not support the Viet Cong
faced intimidation and violence from them.
The Viet Cong started a guerrilla war against the South Vietnamese
Government. Using the HO CHI MINH TRAIL (see Figure 27), the Viet Cong
sent reinforcements and ferried supplies to guerrilla fighters. These fighters
attacked South Vietnamese Government forces, officials and buildings. They
also attacked American air force and supply bases.
In response the South Vietnamese Government launched their ‘strategic
hamlet’ programme, which involved moving peasant villages from Viet
Cong-controlled areas to areas controlled by the South Vietnamese
Government. The Americans helped by supplying building materials, money,
food a nd equipment for the villagers to build improved farms and houses. In
practice this policy backfired as the peasants resented it – and corrupt
officials pocketed money meant to buy supplies for the villagers.
FIGURE 27
Vietnam in the mid-1960s showing the Ho Chi
Minh Trail.
US involvement escalates
By 1962 P resident Kennedy was sending military personnel (he always
called them ‘advisers’) to help the South Vietnamese army fight the Viet
Cong. However, Kennedy said he was determined that the USA would not
‘blunder into war, unclear about aims or how to get out again’. He was a
keen historian himself and had studied the USA’s past successes and failures.
He was well aware from the Korean War ten years earlier what could and
could not be achieved by military intervention.
However, President Kennedy was assassinated in 1963. His successor,
Lyndon Johnson, was more prepared than Kennedy to commit the USA to a
full-scale conflict in Vietnam to prevent the spread of communism.
The Tonkin Gulf Resolution
In August 1964, N orth Vietnamese patrol boats opened fire on US ships in the
Gulf of Tonkin. In a furious reaction, the US Congress passed the Tonkin Gulf
Resolution, which gave the President pow er to ‘take all necessary measures
to prevent further aggression and achieve peace and security’.
It effectively meant that Johnson could take the USA into a full-scale war if
he felt it was necessary, and very soon he did.
•  In February 1965 t he US started OPERATION ROLLING THUNDER – a
gigantic bom bing campaign against North Vietnamese cities, factories,
army bases and the Ho Chi Minh Trail, which continued for three years.
•  On 8 M arch 1965 , 3500 U S marines, combat troops  rather than advisers,
came ashore at Da Nang.
The USA was now officially at war in Vietnam.
SOURCE 28
First is the simple fact that South Vietnam, a member of the free
world family, is striving to preserve its independence from
Communist attack. Second, South East Asia has great significance
in the forward defence of the USA. For Hanoi, the immediate object
is limited: conquest of the south and national unification. For
Peking, however, Hanoi’s victory would only be a first step towards
eventual Chinese dominance of the two Vietnams and South East
Asia and towards exploitation of the new strategy in other parts of
the world.
Robert McNamara, US Defence Secretary,
explaining in 1964 why he supported the
policy of sending US troops to Vietnam.
FIGURE 29
Graph showing escalating US involvement in
Vietnam, 1960–74. The blue line shows US
personnel. The red line shows US deaths. US
troops were not the only foreign soldiers
fighting in Vietnam. About 46,000 Australian
and New Zealand troops fought too.
Source Analysis
Compare Source 28 with Source 1 on page 102. How similar are the
arguments used in 1964 about Vietnam to those used in 1950 about
Korea?
Why did the US send troops to Vietnam?
The answer to this question may seem obvi ous! It was because of the policy
of containment and the ‘domino theory’. That is certainly how the President
and his advisers explained it (see Source 28 for example). However, there is
a more controversial view held by some historians that pow erful groups
within the USA wanted a war.
In 1961 P resident Eisenhower himself warned that America had developed a
powerful ‘military–industrial complex’. The Government gave huge budgets
to the military commanders. These budgets were spent on weapons made by
some of America’s biggest companies. Thus, both the armed forces and
business actually gained from conflict. Eisenhower did not accuse business
and military leaders of anything, but in his last speech as president he warned
the American people not to let these groups become too influential. Some
historians believe that this was a factor in American involvement in Vietnam,
but it is hotly disputed by others.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can recall:
•  two reasons why communism was becoming stronger in Vietnam
•  two measures taken by the USA to resist the spread of
communism.
FOCUS TASK 5.4
Why did the USA get increasingly involved in Vietnam?
1  Draw a timeline of the period 1945–65.
2  Mark on it increasing American involvement using the following
headings:
    •  No direct American involvement
    •  Financial support
    •  Political involvement
    •  Military involvement
3  Write annotations to show the date on which each of these
phases started and what events triggered the increasing
involvement.
4  Choose two events that you think were critical in increasing the
USA’s involvement in the war in Vietnam. Explain your choice.
Tactics and technology in the Vietnam
War
With HINDSIGHT it is easy to see that the American decision to get fully
involved in the war was a huge gamble. But political leaders did not have the
benefit of hindsight. They made their decision on the basis of what they knew
and believed at the time. They knew their technology and firepower was
superior to the Viet Cong and they believed that would allow them to win the
war.
However, they were soon proved wrong. As time wore on it became clear
that the USA needed more than money and technology to win this kind of war.
On the next two pages you will find out why by comparing Viet Cong and US
tactics. Focus Task 5.5 will direct your reading.
FOCUS TASK 5.5
Why couldn’t the Americans win?
Stage 1: Understand the tactics
1  Work in pairs. Take either the Viet Cong or the Americans. Use
page 120 or 121 to find out about the your side’s tactics. Create
a diagram by drawing two concentric circles (one inside the
other) on a large piece of paper.
    •  In the inner circle record the tactics.
    •  In the outer circle the reason for using those tactics.
    •  Draw lines to show how the tactics and reasons are
connected.
Compare your diagram with your partner’s.
Stage 2: Thinking it through
2  Make your own table like this, then using your research from
stage 1 record in columns 2 and 4 how far each side had these
qualities. You can add further rows if you think of other important
qualities.
3  Next, in each row of column 3, draw some scales to show which
way the balance falls for this quality. Did the USA or the Viet
Cong have the advantage?
4  Now think about the overall picture – how the strengths and
weaknesses work together.
    a)  Were the armies finely balanced? Or was the balance
strongly weighted to one side or the other?
    b)  Which quality was most important in determining who won
the war? Was one so important that being ahead in that area
meant that other advantages or disadvantages did not
matter?
Stage 3: Explaining your conclusions
5  Now write up your answer. You could use this structure:
    a)  Describe how the failure of the US army was a combination
of its own weaknesses and Viet Cong strengths.
    b)  Give balanced examples of US successes and failures.
    c)  Give balanced examples of Viet Cong successes and
failures.
    d)  Choose one American weakness and one Viet Cong strength
that you think were absolutely vital in preventing the USA
from beating the Viet Cong and explain the significance of the
points you have chosen.
Revision Tip
Find five reasons why the USA could not defeat the Viet Cong.
Make sure you can recall:
•  two or three strengths of the Viet Cong (with examples)
•  two or three weaknesses of the USA (with examples).
Viet Cong tactics and troops
In early 1965 the Viet Cong had about 170,000 soldiers. They were
heavily outnumbered and outgunned. They were no match for the
US and South Vietnamese forces in open warfare. In November
1965 in the La Dreng Valley, US forces killed 2000 Viet Cong for
the loss of 300 troops. However, this did not daunt Ho Chi Minh.
Guerilla warfare
Ho used GUERRILLA WARFARE. Guerrilla is a Spanish word which
literally means ‘little war’. Guerrilla warfare meant avoiding big
battles and using hit-and-run raids. Guerrillas did not wear uniform.
They were hard to tell apart from the peasants in the villages. They
had no known base camp or headquarters. They worked in small
groups. They attacked then disappeared into the jungle, into the
villages or into tunnels (see Figure 31).
Guerrilla attacks aimed to wear down enemy soldiers and wreck
their morale. US soldiers lived in constant fear of ambushes or
booby traps such as pits filled with sharpened bamboo stakes – 11
per cent of US casualties were caused by booby traps. Another 51
per cent were from ambushes or hand-to-hand combat. The Viet
Cong favoured close-quarter fighting because it knew that the
Americans would not use their air power for fear of hitting their own
troops.
Civilians
Ho knew how important it was to keep the population on his side.
The Viet Cong fighters were courteous and respectful to the
Vietnamese peasants. They helped them in the fields during busy
periods. However, they were quite prepared to kill peasants who
opposed them or who co-operated with their enemies. They also
conducted a campaign of terror against the police, tax collectors,
teachers and any other employees of the South Vietnamese
Government. Between 1966 and 1971 the Viet Cong killed an
estimated 27,000 civilians.
Supplies
The Viet Cong depended on supplies from North Vietnam that
came along the Ho Chi Minh Trail. US and South Vietnamese
planes bombed this constantly, but 40,000 Vietnamese worked to
keep it open whatever the cost.
Commitment
The total of Viet Cong and North Vietnamese dead in the war has
been estimated at 1 million – far higher than US losses. However,
this was a price that Ho Chi Minh was prepared to pay. Whatever
the casualties, there were replacement troops available. The
greatest strength of the Viet Cong fighters was that they simply
refused to give in.
Think!
1  One Viet Cong leader said: ‘The people are the water. Our
armies are the fish.’ What do you think he meant?
2  Find evidence on pages 120–121 to support the view that:
    •  the Viet Cong had the support of the people
    •  the US and South Vietnam forces did not.
SOURCE 30
I remember sitting at this wretched little outpost one day with a
couple of my sergeants. We’d been manning this thing for three
weeks and running patrols off it. We were grungy and sore with
jungle rot and we’d suffered about nine or ten casualties on a
recent patrol. This one sergeant of mine said, ‘You know,
Lieutenant, I don’t see how we’re ever going to win this.’ And I
said, ‘Well, Sarge, I’m not supposed to say this to you as your
officer – but I don’t either.’ So there was this sense that we just
couldn’t see what could be done to defeat these people.
Philip Caputo, a lieutenant in the Marine
Corps in Vietnam in 1965–66, speaking in
1997.
FIGURE 31

A Viet Cong tunnel complex. To avoid the
worst effects of American air power, the
Viet Cong built a vast network of
underground tunnels, probably around 240
km of them.
US tactics and troops
Bombing
The main US tactic was bombing. For seven years from 1965–72
the USA bombed military, industrial and civilian targets in North
Vietnam; they bombed the Ho Chi Minh Trail; they bombed
Vietnam’s neighbours Laos and Cambodia (who were sympathetic
to the Viet Cong).
To some extent bombing worked. It damaged North Vietnam’s war
effort and it disrupted supply routes. From 1970 to 1972, intense
bombing of North Vietnam forced it to negotiate for peace.
However, air power could not defeat the communists. Even after
major air raids on North Vietnam in 1972, the communists were still
able to launch a major assault on the South. Even more important,
civilian casualties helped turn the Vietnamese people against the
Americans.
Search and destroy
To combat guerrilla warfare the US commander General
Westmoreland developed a policy OF SEARCH AND DESTROY. He set
up heavily defended US bases in South Vietnam near to the coasts.
From here helicopters full of troops would descend on a village and
search out and destroy any Viet Cong forces they found. Soldiers
had to send back reports of body counts.
Search-and-destroy missions did kill Viet Cong soldiers, but there
were problems.
•  The raids were often based on inadequate information.
•  Inexperienced US troops often walked into traps.
•  Innocent villages were mistaken for Viet Cong strongholds. For
every Viet Cong weapon captured by search and destroy, there
was a body count of six. Many of these were innocent civilians.
•  Search-and-destroy tactics made the US and South Vietnamese
forces very unpopular with the peasants. It pushed them towards
supporting the Viet Cong.
SOURCE 32
You would go out, you would secure a piece of terrain during the
daylight hours, [but at night] you’d surrender that – and I mean
literally surrender … you’d give it up, because … the helicopters
would come in and pick you up at night and fly you back to the
security of your base camp.
Lieutenant Colonel George Forrest, US
Army.
Chemical weapons
The USA also used CHEMICAL WEAPONS to combat the Viet Cong.
•  AGENT ORANGE was a highly toxic ‘weedkiller’ sprayed from
planes to destroy the jungle where the Viet Cong hid. The
Americans used 82 million litres of Agent Orange to spray
thousands of square kilometres of jungle.
•  NAPALM was another widely used chemical weapon. It destroyed
jungles where guerrillas might hide. It also burned through skin to
the bone.
•  Many civilians and soldiers were also killed or harmed by these
chemical weapons.
Conscription and morale
In the early stages of the war most US troops were professional
soldiers. Morale was good and they performed well. However, as
the war intensified the US needed more soldiers so they introduced
the DRAFT (CONSCRIPTION). As soon as young men left school or
college they could be called up into the US army. So from 1967:
•  Many soldiers were young men who had never been in the army
before. The average age of US troops was only 19.
•  The conscripts knew little about Vietnam – and some cared little
about DEMOCRACY or communism. They just wanted to get home
alive. In contrast the Viet Cong were fighting for their own
country, and a cause many of them believed in.
•  Morale among the US conscripts was often very low. To tackle
this problem the generals introduced a policy of giving troops just
a one-year term of service. This backfired because as soon as
the soldiers gained experience they were sent home.
SOURCE 33
A ten-year-old Vietnamese girl, Phan Thi
Kim, runs naked after tearing her burning
clothes from her body following a napalm
attack in 1972. This photograph became
one of the most enduring images of the
war.
SOURCE 34
In the end anybody who was still in that country was the enemy.
The same village you’d gone in to give them medical treatment
… you could go through that village later and get shot at by a
sniper. Go back in and you would not find anybody. Nobody
knew anything. We were trying to work with these people, they
were basically doing a number on us. You didn’t trust them
anymore. You didn’t trust anybody.
Fred Widmer, an American soldier,
speaking in 1969.
The Tet Offensive
Despite these problems the official American view of the war from 1965 t o
1967 w as that it was going reasonably well. The US and South Vietnamese
forces were killing large numbers of Viet Cong. Although they were
struggling against guerrilla tactics they were confident that the enemy was
being worn dow n. The press reports reflected this positive view.
This confidence was shattered early in 1968. During the New Year holiday,
Viet Cong fighters attacked ove r 100 c ities and other military targets. One
Viet Cong commando unit tried to capture the US embassy in Saigon. US
forces had to fight to regain control room by room. Around 4500 V iet Cong
fighters tied dow n a much larger US and South Vietnamese force in Saigon
for two days.
A turning point
In many ways the TET OFFENSIVE was a disaster for the communists. They
had hoped that the people of South Vietnam would rise up and join them.
They didn’t. The Viet Cong lost around 10,000 e xperienced fighters and were
badly weakened by it.
However, the Tet Offensive proved to be a turning point in the war because it
raised hard questions in the USA about the war.
•  There were nearly 500,000 t roops  in Vietnam and the USA was spending
$20 bi llion a year on the war. So why had the communists been able to
launch a major offensive that took US forces completely by surprise?
•  US and South Vietnamese forces quickly retook the towns captured in the
offensive, but in the process they used enormous amounts of artillery and
air pow er. Many civilians were killed. The ancient city of Hue was
destroyed. Was this right?
Media reaction
Until this point media coverage of the war was generally positive, although
some journalists were beginning to ask difficult questions in 1967. During the
Tet Offensive the gloves came off. CBS journalist Walter Cronkite (see
Source 35) asked ‘What the hell is going on? I thought we were winning this
war’. Don Oberdorfer of The Washington Post later wrote (in 1971)  that as
a result of the Tet Offensive ‘the American people and most of their leaders
reached the conclusion that the Vietnam War would require greater effort
over a far longer period of  time than it was worth’.
SOURCE 35
CBS News journalist Walter Cronkite
reporting in Vietnam in February 1968. He
was regarded as the most trusted man in
America.
SOURCE 36
The Tet Offensive was the decisive battle of the Vietnam War
because of its profound impact on American attitudes about
involvement in Southeast Asia. In the aftermath of Tet, many
Americans became disillusioned … To the American public and
even to members of the administration, the offensive demonstrated
that US intervention … had produced a negligible effect on the will
and capability of the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese.
Extract from The Tet Offensive: Intelligence
Failure in War by James Wirtz.
The peace movement in the USA
For a war on such a scale the Government had to have the support of the
American people. With deaths and injuries to so many young Americans,
PUBLIC OPINION had been turning against the war even before the Tet
Offensive. After it the trickle of antiwar feeling became a flood:
•  Cost: The war was draining money that could be used to better purposes at
home (see Sources 38 and 39). Yet despite all that spending the USA did
not seem to be any closer to winning the war.
•  Inequality: The draft exposed racial inequality in the USA: 30 pe r cent of
African Americans were drafted compared to only 19 pe r cent of white
Americans; 22 pe r cent of US casualties were black Americans, even
though this group made up only 11 per cent of the total US force. World
champion boxer Muhammad Ali refused to join the army on the grounds of
his Muslim faith. He was stripped of his world title and his passport was
removed. Ali was a follower of the RADICAL Black Power group called
Nation of Islam. They argued: How could they fight for a country which
discriminated against them at home? As some of them pointed out, ‘the Viet
Cong never called us nigger’.
•  Purpose: Most damaging of all, an increasing number of Americans felt
deeply uncomfortable about what was going on in Vietnam.
SOURCE 37
One does not use napalm on villages and hamlets sheltering
civilians if one is attempting to persuade these people of the
rightness of one’s cause. One does not defoliate [destroy the
vegetation of] the country and deform its people with chemicals if
one is attempting to persuade them of the foe’s evil nature.
An American comments on US policy failure
in Vietnam.
‘What are we fighting for?’
The Vietnam War was a media war. Thousands of television, radio and
newspaper reporters, and a vast army of photographers sent back to the USA
and Europe reports and pictures of the fighting. The newspapers showed
crying children burned by American napalm bom bs (see Source 33).
Television showed prisoners being tortured or executed, or women and
children watching with horror as their house was set on fire. To see such
casual violence beamed into the living rooms of the USA was deeply
shocking to the average American. Was this why 900,000 y oung Americans
had been drafted? Instead of Vietnam being a symbol of a US crusade against
communism, Vietnam had become a symbol of defeat, confusion and moral
corruption. The most pow erful illustration of this was the My Lai massacre
(see page 124).
Protest
The antiwar protests, led by students and civil rights campaigners, reached
their height during 1968–70.
•  In the first half of 1968, t here were over 100 de monstrations against the
Vietnam War involving 40,000 s tudents. Frequently, the protest would
involve burning the American flag – a criminal offence in the USA and a
powerful symbol of the students’ rejection of American values. Students
taunted the American President Lyndon B Johnson with the chant ‘Hey, Hey
LBJ; how many kids did you kill today?’
•  In November 1969, a lmost 700,000 a ntiwar protesters demonstrated in
Washington DC. It was the largest political protest in American history.
SOURCE 38
An American cartoon from 1967.
SOURCE 39
The promises of the Great Society have been shot down on the
battlefields of Vietnam … The war has put us in the position of
protecting a corrupt government. We are spending $500,000 to kill
every Viet Cong soldier while we spend only $53 for every person
considered to be in poverty in the USA.
Civil rights leader Martin Luther King speaking
in the USA in April 1968. The Great Society
was President Johnson’s plan for reforms to
help the poorest in the USA.
Source Analysis
1  Who or what is the cartoonist criticising in Source 38?
2  Which do you think is more effective as a criticism of the Vietnam
War – Source 37, 38 or 39? Give reasons based on the source
and your knowledge of the USA at this time.
The My Lai massacre
In March 1968, a  unit of young American soldiers called Charlie Company
started a search-and-destroy mission. They had been told that in My Lai there
was a Viet Cong headquarters, and 200 V iet Cong guerrillas. They had been
ordered to destroy all houses, dwellings and livestock. They had been told
that all the villagers would have left for market because it was a Saturday.
Most of them were under the impression that they had been ordered to kill
everyone they found in the village.
Early in the morning of 16 M arch, Charlie Company arrived in My Lai. In the
next four hours, between 300 a nd 400 c ivilians were killed. They were
mostly women, children and old men. Some were killed as they worked in
their fields; others in their homes. Many were mown dow n by machine-gun
fire as they were herded into an irrigation ditch. No Viet Cong were found.
Only three weapons were recovered.
SOURCE 40
Most of the soldiers had never been away from home before they
went into service. They thought they were going to do something
courageous on behalf of their country, something which they
thought was in the American ideal.
But it didn’t mean slaughtering whole villages of women and
children. One of my friends, when he told me about it, said: ‘You
know it was a Nazi kind of thing.’ We didn’t go there to be Nazis. At
least none of the people I knew went there to be Nazis.
Written by Ronald Ridenhour, a US soldier in
Vietnam. He was not at My Lai, but
interviewed many witnesses and started a
campaign to pressure the US authorities to
investigate properly.
‘Something dark and bloody’
At the time, the army treated the operation as a success. The commanding
officer’s report said that twenty non-combatants had been killed by accident
in the attack, but the rest of the dead were recorded as being Viet Cong.
However, twelve months later, a letter arrived in the offices of 30 leading
politicians and government officials in Washington. It was written by Ronald
Ridenhour, an American soldier who had served in Vietnam and who
personally knew many of the soldiers who took part in the massacre. He had
evidence, he said, of ‘something rather dark and bloody ’ that had occurred in
My Lai – or Pinkville as the American soldiers called it. He recounted in
detail the stories he had been told about what had taken place and asked
Congress to investigate.
Investigation
Soon after, Life magazine, one of the most influential magazines in the USA,
published photographs of the massacre at My Lai (see Source 41) that had
been taken by an official army photographer. This triggered an investigation
that ended in the trial for mass murder of Lieutenant William Calley. He was
an officer in Charlie Company. He had personally shot many of the people in
the irrigation ditch at My Lai. In September 1969 h e was formally charged
with murdering 109 pe ople. Ten other members of the company and the
commanding officers were also charged.
SOURCE 41
A photograph taken at My Lai on 16 March
1968 by Ron Haeberle (see Source 42).
Aftermath
The revelations were deeply shocking to the American people. The charges
were also too m uch for the army. They placed responsibility on Calley. They
denied that Calley was acting under orders. His senior officers were
acquitted. After a long court case surrounded by massive media attention and
publicity, Calley was found guilty of the murder of 22 c ivilians. In August
1971 h e was sentenced to twenty years’ hard labour. In November 1974 h e
was released.
Think!
1  Why do you think it took twelve months for anyone to do
anything about the massacre?
2  Why was the massacre so shocking to the American public?
SOURCE 42
I think I was in a kind of daze from seeing all these shootings and
not seeing any returning fire. The Americans were rounding up the
people and shooting them, not taking any prisoners … I was part of
it, everyone who was there was part of it and that includes the
General and the Colonel flying above in their helicopters … I did
not pay any attention to who did it. By that time I knew what the
score was. It was an atrocity … I notice this one small boy had
been shot in the foot … he was walking toward the group of bodies
looking for his mother … then suddenly I heard a crack and … I
saw this child flip on top of the pile of bodies. The GI just stood and
walked away. No remorse. Nothing.
Ron Haeberle, the US army official
photographer. His black and white pictures
for the army and his colour photographs
taken with his own private camera had a
dramatic public impact.
Source Analysis
Source 42 was written by someone who worked for the US army.
Does that make it a trustworthy source?
Ending the war in Vietnam
After the Tet Offensive President Johnson concluded that the war could not
be won militarily. He reduced the bom bing campaign against North Vietnam
and instructed his officials to begin negotiating for peace with the
communists.
Johnson also announced that he would not be seeking re-election as
president. It was an admission of failure. In the election campaign both
candidates campaigned to end US involvement in Vietnam. The antiwar
feeling was so strong that if they had supported continuing the war they
would have had no chance of being elected anyway. It was no longer a
question of ‘could the USA win the war?’ but ‘how can the USA get out of
Vietnam without it looking like a defeat?’
A new president
In November 1968 R ichard Nixon was elected president. From 1969 t o 1973
he and his National Security Adviser Henry Kissinger worked to end US
involvement in Vietnam. This was not easy because the bigger question of
how to contain world communism – the one that had got the USA into
Vietnam in the first place – had not gone away. They did not want to appear
simply to hand Vietnam to the communists. They used a range of strategies.
Improved relations with USSR and China
In 1969 the USSR and China fell out. It seemed possible that there
would even be a war between these two powerful communist
countries. As a result, both the USSR and China tried to improve
relations with the USA.
‘Vietnamisation’ of the war effort
In Vietnam Nixon began handing responsibility for the war to South
Vietnamese forces and withdrawing US troops (a process they
called VIETNAMISATION). Between April 1969 and the end of 1971
almost 400,000 US troops left Vietnam.
Peace negotiations with North Vietnam
From early 1969, Kissinger had regular meetings with the chief
Vietnamese peace negotiator, Le Duc Tho.
Increased bombing
At the same time Nixon increased bombing campaigns against
North Vietnam to show he was not weak. US and South
Vietnamese troops also invaded Viet Cong bases in Cambodia,
causing outrage across the world, and even in the USA.
‘Peace with honour’
In Paris in January 1973 a ll parties signed a peace agreement. Nixon
described it as ‘peace with honour’. Others disagreed (see Source 43), but
the door  was now open for Nixon to pull out all US troops . By 29 M arch
1973 t he last American forces had left Vietnam.
It is not clear whether Nixon really believed he had secured a lasting peace
settlement. But within two years, without the support of the USA, South
Vietnam had fallen to the communists. One of the bleakest symbols of
American failure in Vietnam was the televised news images of desperate
Vietnamese men, women and children trying to clamber aboard American
helicopters taking off from the US embassy. All around them communist
forces swarmed through Saigon. After 30 y ears of constant conflict, the
struggle for control of Vietnam had finally been settled and the communists
had won.
SOURCE 43
FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS
… the nation began at last to extricate itself from a quicksandy war
that had plagued four Presidents and driven one from office, that
had sundered the country more deeply than any event since the
Civil War, that in the end came to be seen by a great majority of
Americans as having been a tragic mistake.
… but its more grievous toll was paid at home – a wound to the
spirit so sore that news of peace stirred only the relief that comes
with an end to pain. A war that produced no famous victories, no
national heroes and no strong patriotic songs, produced no
memorable armistice day celebrations either. America was too
exhausted by the war and too chary of peace to celebrate.
Reaction to the agreement of January 1973
in the influential American news magazine
Newsweek, 5 February 1973.
Source Analysis
1  Describe the attitude of Source 43 to the agreement of January
1973.
2  Are you surprised by this source?
How did the Vietnam War affect the
policy of containment?
The American policy of containment was in tatters.
•  It had failed militarily. The war had shown that even the USA’s vast
military strength could not stem the spread of communism.
•  It had also failed strategically. Not only did the USA fail to stop South
Vietnam going communist, but the heavy bom bing of Vietnam’s neighbours,
Laos and Cambodia, actually helped the communist forces in those
countries to win support. By 1975 bot h Laos and Cambodia had communist
governments. Instead of slowing dow n the dom ino effect in the region,
American policies actually speeded it up.
•  It was also a propagan da disaster. The Americans had always presented
their campaign against communism as a moral crusade. But atrocities
committed by American soldiers and the use of chemical weapons
damaged the USA’s reputation. In terms of a crusade for ‘democracy’ the
Americans were seen to be propping up a government that did not have the
support of its own people.
Theses failures greatly affected the USA’s future policies towards communist
states. After the war, the Americans tried to improve their relations with
China. They ended their block on China’s membership of the UN. The
President made visits to China. The USA also entered into a period of
greater understanding with the Soviet Union. In fact, during the 1970s  both
the Soviet Union and China got on better with the USA than they did with
each other.
The Americans also became very suspicious of involving their troops  in any
other conflict that they could not easily and ove rwhelmingly win. This was
an attitude that continued to affect American foreign policy into the twenty-
first century.
Revision Tip
You can use the cards from Focus Task 5.6 below for your
revision. Take a photo of your completed layout showing and
annotating the connections. This will be a good essay plan if you
have to write on this topic for an assignment. Make sure you can
remember one piece of evidence to go with each point.
FOCUS TASK 5.6
Why did US policy fail in Vietnam?
Despite all the money it spent and the effort they put in, the USA
failed to contain the spread of communism to South Vietnam. You
are now going to consider the reasons for this.
1  Make cards like these. On each card write an explanation or
paste a source which shows the importance of the reason, i.e.
how it damaged the policy of containment. Add other cards if
you think there are reasons you should consider.
2  Lay your cards out on a large sheet of paper and add lines to
show connections between the reasons. Write an explanation of
the connection.
US military tactics in Vietnam
The unpopularity of the South Vietnamese regime
The experience of the Viet Cong and the inexperience of the
American soldiers
Opposition in the USA
Other countries’ support for the Viet Cong
Revision Tip
All these case studies (Korea, Cuba, Vietnam) are important
because they each show different aspects of containment in action.
Make sure you are equally confident about each one and can
explain in your own words whether it was a success or failure for
containment.
FOCUS TASK 5.7
How successful was the USA’s policy of containment 1950–
75?
1  Look back at your chart from page 105. Complete it for the
Vietnam War.
2  You have now looked at three very different case studies of the
USA’s attempts to contain communism. Using the work you have
done for Focus Tasks 5.1, 5.3 and 5.6 on pages 105, 115 and
this page, explain:
    •  how far the policy of containment succeeded
    •  the main reasons for its success or failure.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Agent Orange
•  Armistice
•  Arms race
•  Atomic bomb/H bomb
•  Bay of Pigs
•  Blockade
•  Capitalism
•  CENTO
•  CIA
•  Cold War
•  Cominform
•  Communism
•  Containment
•  Conventional weapons
•  Democracy
•  Dictator
•  Diplomatic relations
•  Domino theory
•  Draft
•  Guerrilla warfare
•  Ho Chi Minh Trail
•  ICBM
•  Indochina
•  Intelligence (as in CIA)
•  Landlord/peasant
•  MAD
•  Missile gap
•  Napalm
•  Nuclear deterrent
•  Operation Rolling Thunder
•  Satellite state
•  Search and destroy
•  SEATO
•  Surveillance
•  Tet Offensive
•  United Nations
•  US sphere of influence
•  Viet Cong
•  Viet Minh
•  Vietnamisation
•  Warsaw Pact
Chapter Summary
Containment
1  The USA was anticommunist and wanted to limit the spread of
communism around the world – this policy was called
containment.
Korea
2  When a communist government tried to take over in Korea in
1950 the USA sent troops to help prevent Korea falling to the
communists.
3  The result was a stalemate and in 1953 Korea was divided into a
communist north (friendly towards China) and a capitalist south
(friendly towards the USA).
Cuba
4  Cuba turned communist in 1959. Cuba is a large island very
close to the USA.
5  In the 1960s there was a nuclear arms race between the USA
and USSR with ever more dangerous nuclear weapons being
developed and tested by both sides.
6  The Soviet leader Khrushchev sent nuclear weapons to Cuba.
The USA and much of the world were worried that this might
lead to the first nuclear war with dreadful consequences.
7  The US President Kennedy ordered a blockade of Cuba to
prevent the weapons arriving and the crisis was averted. Better
relations between the two leaders followed.
Vietnam
  8  The next area of worry was South-east Asia where communism
was very strong. The USA believed in the domino theory – if one
country turned communist then the neighbouring countries would
follow so they wanted to stop any country turning communist.
  9  In 1954 following a civil war Vietnam was divided into a
communist north and a capitalist south but the north, with the
help of communist China, tried to take over the south too.
10  The USA decided to help the south to resist the threat of the
communist north by first sending money and advisers then
combat troops.
11  They got more and more involved, to the point where hundreds
of thousands of US troops were fighting in Vietnam (the USA
introduced conscription to provide enough soldiers), and
thousands were being killed each year.
12  Despite all this investment the USA was not winning this war.
The war lost support at home and the USA decided to withdraw
from Vietnam and leave South Vietnam to its fate. It finally fell to
the communists in 1975.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  Describe the domino theory. [4]
    (b)  Explain why the USA sent troops to Vietnam in the mid-
1960s. [6]
    (c)  ‘The Americans failed in Vietnam because they used the
wrong tactics.’ How far do you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer. [10]
2  Study Source 15 on page 109. How reliable is this source? Use
the source and your knowledge to explain your answer. [7]
3  Study Sources 19 and 20 on page 112. How similar are these
two sources? Use the sources and your knowledge to explain
your answer. [8]
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
6 How secure was the USSR’s
control over eastern Europe,
1948–c.1989?
FOCUS POINTS
•  Why was there opposition to Soviet control in Hungary in 1956
and Czechoslovakia in 1968, and how did the USSR react to this
opposition?
•  How similar were events in Hungary in 1956 and in
Czechoslovakia in 1968?
•  Why was the Berlin Wall built in 1961?
•  What was the significance of ‘Solidarity’ in Poland for the decline
of Soviet influence in eastern Europe?
•  How far was Gorbachev personally responsible for the collapse
of Soviet control over eastern Europe?

Here are two version of the same photo. The first shows the
leader of Czechoslovakia, Alexander Dubčcek. The second is
the same photo used by the communist-controlled media after
Dubčcek had been ousted from power by Soviet troops in
1968.
1  How has the photo been changed?
2  Why might the photo have been changed?
3  What does this tell you about communist control of
Czechoslovakia in 1968?
In Chapter 4 you saw how the SOVIET UNION took control of eastern Europe.
You are now going to return to that story and see how far the Soviet Union
was able to maintain that control.
You will investigate:
•  how the Soviet Union took control in eastern Europe and how it tried to
maintain control
•  why and how some people challenged Soviet control and what happened to
them when they did
•  how, finally, changes in the Soviet Union led to the collapse of all the
communist regimes in eastern Europe and indeed the collapse of the Soviet
Union.
The key question you will consider is ‘how secure’ was this control.
The Soviet Union almost certainly did not feel it was secure. It kept up
constant pressure on the governments and people of eastern Europe. It was
really only the threat of sending in the RED ARMY that proppe d up some of the
communist regimes in the region long after their people had lost faith in their
government. In the end it was Mikhail Gorbachev’s unwillingness to prop
them up any longer with Soviet troops  that signalled the end of Soviet
domination.
So which of these graphs do y ou think is the best representation of Soviet
control through this period?
How did the Soviet Union control
eastern Europe?
As you saw in Chapter 4, after the Second World War the communists quickly
gained control of eastern Europe with the help of the Soviet Union and the
Red Army (see Figure 17 on page 91).
Soviet leader STALIN was determined that eastern Europe would be a SOVIET
SPHERE OF INFLUENCE. This meant that eastern Europe would be dom inated
politically and economically by the USSR. The eastern European countries
were controlled by their communist governments, but Stalin kept tight control
of them, particularly through the Cominform (see Factfile). For Stalin,
eastern Europe would serve as a buffer against a future attack on the USSR.
He also wanted the resources of eastern Europe to help rebuild the USSR’s
industries and economy after the terrible damage caused by the war against
Germany. He used COMECON to ensure this.
Factfile
Cominform
•  Cominform stands for the Communist Information Bureau.
•  Stalin set up the Cominform in 1947 as an organisation to co-
ordinate the various communist governments in eastern Europe.
•  The office was originally based in Belgrade in Yugoslavia but
moved to Bucharest in Romania in 1948 after Yugoslavia was
expelled by Stalin because it would not do what the Soviet Union
told it to do.
•  Cominform ran meetings and sent out instructions to communist
governments about what the Soviet Union wanted them to do.
Comecon
•  Comecon stands for the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance.
•  It was set up in 1949 to co-ordinate the industries and trade of
the eastern European countries.
•  The idea was that members of Comecon traded mostly with one
another rather than trading with the West.
•  Comecon favoured the USSR far more than any of its other
members. It provided the USSR with a market to sell its goods. It
also guaranteed it a cheap supply of raw materials. For example,
Poland was forced to sell its coal to the USSR at one-tenth of the
price that it could have got selling it on the open market.
•  It set up a bank for socialist countries in 1964.
The impact on ordinary people
For some people of eastern Europe the communists initially brought hope.
The Soviet Union had achieved amazing industrial growth before the Second
World War. Maybe, by following Soviet methods, they could do t he same.
However, the reality of Soviet control of eastern Europe was very different
from what people had hoped for.
•  Freedom Countries that had a long tradition of free speech and democratic
government suddenly lost the right to criticise the government. Newspapers
were censored. Non-communists were put in prison for criticising the
government. People were forbidden to travel to countries in western
Europe. Protests, such as those in East Germany in 1953, w ere crushed by
security forces.
•  Wealth Between 1945 a nd 1955 e astern European economies did recover,
but soon wages in eastern Europe fell behind the wages in other countries.
People in eastern Europe were short of coal to heat their houses. Clothing
and shoes were very expensive.
•  Consumer good s People could not get consumer goods  like radios,
electric kettles or televisions, which were becoming common in the West.
The economies of Eastern Europe were geared towards helping the Soviet
Union. Factories produced items such as machinery or electric cables, not
what ordinary people wanted.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain in your own words:
•  the role of Cominform and Comecon
•  the role of the Red Army
•  in keeping control of eastern Europe.
Stalin to Khrushchev: a new era?
When Stalin died in 1953 m any people in eastern Europe hoped for a more
relaxed form of rule. After some pow er struggles in the USSR the new leader
who emerged in 1955 w as Nikita Khrushchev. He appeared to be very
different from Stalin. He talked of peaceful CO-EXISTENCE with the West. He
talked of improving the lives of ordinary citizens. He closed dow n
Cominform and released thousands of political prisoners. In an astonishing
speech in 1956 h e openly denounced Stalin for his harsh rule.
This new approach from the Soviet leader encouraged some critics of
communist rule. In the summer of 1956 l arge demonstrations broke out in
Poland. Protestors demanded reforms and the appointment of the Polish war-
time resistance leader Wladyslaw Gomulka as the new Polish leader. There
were violent clashes between protesters and Polish police. Gomulka was not
the loyal ally Khrushchev would have wanted, bu t he compromised and
accepted Gomulka as the new Polish leader. At the same time he moved
Soviet tanks and troops  to the Polish border just to make it clear that he
would only compromise so far.
The world watched with interest. Who was the real Khrushchev – the
compromiser with new ideas or the Soviet leader who moved tanks to the
Polish border? In October 1956 t he answer would become clear.
Revision Tip
Make sure you know two ways in which Khrushchev appeared to
be different from Stalin in 1955.
SOURCE 1
A 1959 Soviet cartoon. The writing on the
snowman’s hat reads ‘Cold War’. Khrushchev
is drilling through the Cold War using what the
caption calls ‘miners’ methods’. The cartoon
uses very strong visual images like
Khrushchev’s modern style of clothing to
emphasise his new ideas. And of course he is
breaking up the Cold War!
ACTIVITY
Look at Source 1.
1  Make a list of the features of the cartoon that show Khrushchev
as a new type of leader.
2  Design another cartoon that shows him relaxing the Soviet grip
on eastern Europe. Think about:
  •  how you would show Khrushchev
  •  how you would represent the states of eastern Europe (as
maps? as people?)
  •  how you would represent Soviet control (as a rope? getting
looser? tighter?).
You could either draw the cartoon or write instructions for an artist
to do so.
Case study 1: Hungary, 1956
From 1949 t o 1956 H ungary was led by a hardline communist called Mátyás
Rákosi. Hungarians hated the restrictions imposed on them. Most Hungarians
felt bitter about losing their FREEDOM OF SPEECH. They lived in fear of the
SECRET POLICE. They resented the presence of thousands of Soviet troops  and
officials in their country. Some areas of Hungary even had Russian street
signs, Russian schools and shops. Worst of all, Hungarians had to pay for
Soviet forces to be in Hungary.
SOURCE 2
Living standards were declining and yet the papers and radio kept
saying that we had never had it so good. Why? Why these lies?
Everybody knew the state was spending the money on armaments.
Why could they not admit that we were worse off because of the
war effort and the need to build new factories? … I finally arrived at
the realisation that the system was wrong and stupid.
A Hungarian student describes the mood in
1953.
SOURCE 3
… wearing clothes patterned after Western styles, showing interest
in Jazz, expressing liberalism in the arts – was considered
dangerous in the eyes of the people’s democracy. To cite a small
example … My university colleague, John, showed up at lectures
one day several weeks before the revolution in a new suit and a
striped shirt and necktie, which he had received from an uncle in
the United States through gift-parcel channels. His shoes were
smooth suede and would have cost one month’s wages in Hungary.
After class John was summoned by the party officer. He received a
tongue-lashing and was expelled.
Written by László Beke, a student who
helped lead the Hungarian uprising in 1956, in
A Student’s Diary: Budapest October 16–
November 1, 1956.
What happened?
•  Opposition: In June 1956 a  group within the Communist Party in Hungary
oppos ed Rákosi. He appealed to Khrushchev for help. He wanted to arrest
400 l eading oppon ents. Moscow would not back him. Khrushchev ordered
Rákosi to be retired ‘for health reasons’.
•  Protest: The new leader, Ernö Gerö, was no more acceptable to the
Hungarian people. Discontent came to a head with a huge student
demonstration on 23 O ctober, when the giant statue of Stalin in Budapest
was pulled dow n.
•  Reform: The USSR allowed a new government to be formed under the
well-respected Imre Nagy. In October Soviet troops  and tanks that had
been stationed in Hungary since the Second World War began to withdraw.
Hungarians created thousands of local councils to replace Soviet pow er.
Several thousand Hungarian soldiers defected from the army to the rebel
cause, taking their weapons with them.
•  Plans: Nagy’s Government began to make plans. It would hold free
elections, create impartial courts and restore farmland to private
ownership. It wanted the total withdrawal of the Soviet army from
Hungary. It also planned to leave the Warsaw Pact and declare Hungary
neutral in the Cold War struggle between East and West. There was
widespread opt imism that the new American President Eisenhower, who
had been the wartime supreme commander of all Allied Forces in western
Europe, would support the new independent Hungary with armed troops  if
necessary.
FOCUS TASK 6.1
Why was there opposition to Soviet control in Hungary?
1  Use the text and Sources 2 and 3 to list reasons why some
Hungarians were opposed to communist control – for example,
they resented the presence of Soviet troops.
2  List the changes proposed by Nagy’s Government.
3  Which of these proposed changes do you think would be most
threatening to the USSR? Give reasons.
How did the Soviet Union respond?
Khrushchev at first seemed ready to accept some of the reforms. However, he
could not accept Hungary leaving the Warsaw Pact. In November 1956
thousands of Soviet troops  and tanks moved into Budapest. The Hungarians
did not give in. Two weeks of bitter fighting followed. Some estimates put
the number of Hungarians killed at 30,000. However, the latest research
suggests about 3000 H ungarians and up to 1000 R ussians were killed.
Another 200,000 H ungarians fled across the border into Austria to escape the
communist forces.
The WESTERN POWERS protested to the USSR but sent no help; they were too
preoccupied with a crisis of their own (the Suez crisis in the Middle East).
Revision Tip
Test yourself to see if you can remember:
•  two important reasons that the Hungarians rebelled against
Soviet control in 1956
•  two changes brought about by Nagy
•  how Khrushchev reacted at first, then changed his mind, then
changed it again.
SOURCE 4
In Hungary thousands of people have obtained arms by disarming
soldiers and militia men … Soldiers have been making friends with
the embittered and dissatisfied masses … The authorities are
paralysed, unable to stop the bloody events.
From a report in a Yugoslav newspaper.
Yugoslavia, although communist, did not
approve of Soviet policies.
SOURCE 5
We have almost no weapons, no heavy guns of any kind. People
are running up to the tanks, throwing in hand grenades and closing
the drivers’ windows. The Hungarian people are not afraid of death.
It is only a pity that we cannot last longer. Now the firing is starting
again. The tanks are coming nearer and nearer. You can’t let
people attack tanks with their bare hands. What is the United
Nations doing?
A telex message sent by the Hungarian
rebels fighting the communists. Quoted in
George Mikes, The Hungarian Revolution,
1957.
SOURCE 6
October 27, 1956. On my way home I saw a little girl propped up
against the doorway of a building with a machine gun clutched in
her hands. When I tried to move her, I saw she was dead. She
couldn’t have been more than eleven or twelve years old. There
was a neatly folded note in her pocket she had evidently meant to
pass on through someone to her parents. In childish scrawl it read:
‘Dear Mama, Brother is dead. He asked me to take care of his gun.
I am all right, and I’m going with friends now. I kiss you. Kati.’
Written by László Beke, a Hungarian student.
SOURCE 7
A photograph of Erika Szeles, a fifteen-year-
old rebel, taken by a news photographer
from Denmark in 1956. Erika helped the
rebels as a nurse and then took up a weapon
and fought. She was killed by Soviet troops in
a fire fight in November 1956. The
photograph appeared on the front cover of
several newspapers and magazines in
western Europe and the USA.
Source Analysis
1  How do Sources 4 and 5 differ in the impression they give of the
Hungarian uprising?
2  Why do you think they differ?
3  Does the photo in Source 7 give the same impression as either
Source 4 or Source 5?
4  Work in pairs. Study Sources 4–7 and choose one source. Try to
convince your partner that your source is the most useful source
for studying events in Hungary in 1956.
Think!
1  Look back at Figure 17 in Chapter 4 (page 91). Why do you
think Hungary’s membership of the Warsaw Pact was so
important to the Soviet Union?
2  Why do you think the Hungarians received no support from the
West?
3  Explain which of these statements you most agree with:
Outcomes
Khrushchev put János Kádár in place as leader. Kádár took several months to
crush all resistance. Around 35,000 a nticommunist activists were arrested
and 300 w ere executed. Kádár cautiously introduced some of the reforms
demanded by the Hungarian people. However, he did not waver on the
central issue – membership of the Warsaw Pact.
Case study 2: Czechoslovakia and the
Prague Spring, 1968
Twelve years after the brutal suppression of the Hungarians, Czechoslovakia
posed a similar challenge to Soviet dom ination of eastern Europe.
Khrushchev had by now been ousted from pow er in the USSR. A new leader,
Leonid Brezhnev, had replaced him.
SOURCE 8
In Czechoslovakia the people who were trusted [by the Communist
government] were the obedient ones, those who did not cause any
trouble, who didn’t ask questions. It was the mediocre man who
came off best.
In twenty years not one human problem has been solved in our
country, from primary needs like flats, schools, to the more subtle
needs such as fulfilling oneself … the need for people to trust one
another … development of education.
I feel that our Republic has lost its good reputation.
From a speech given by Ludvik Vaculik, a
leading figure in the reform movement, in
March 1968.
What happened?
In the 1960s  a new mood de veloped in Czechoslovakia.
•  New leader: In 1967 t he old Stalinist leader was replaced by Alexander
Dubcček. He propos ed a policy of ‘socialism with a human face’: less
CENSORSHIP, more freedom of speech and a reduction in the activities of
the secret police. Dubcček was a committed communist, but he believed
that COMMUNISM did not have to be as restrictive as it had been before he
came to pow er. He had learned the lessons of the Hungarian uprising and
reassured Brezhnev that Czechoslovakia had no plans to pull out of the
Warsaw Pact or Comecon.
•  New ideas: As censorship eased, oppon ents were able to criticise the
failings of communist rule, expose corruption and ask awkward questions
about events in the country’s recent past. This period be came known as
‘the PRAGUE SPRING’ because of all the new ideas that seemed to be
appearing everywhere. By the summer even more RADICAL ideas were
emerging. There was even talk of allowing another political party, the
Social Democratic Party, to be set up as a rival to the Communist Party.
SOURCE 9
The Director told them they would produce 400 locomotives a year.
They are making seventy.
And go look at the scrapyard, at all the work that has been thrown
out. They built a railway and then took it down again. Who’s
responsible for all this? The Communist Party set up the system.
We were robbed of our output, our wages … How can I believe that
in five years’ time it won’t be worse?
Ludvik Vaculik quotes from an interview he
had with the workers in a locomotive factory
run by the communists.
SOURCE 10
All the different kinds of state in which the Communist Party has
taken power have gone through rigged trials … There must be a
fault other than just the wrong people were chosen. There must be
a fault in the theory [of communism] itself.
Written by Lubosč Dubrovsky, a Czech writer,
in May 1968.
How did the Soviet Union respond?
The Soviet Union was very suspicious of the changes taking place in
Czechoslovakia. So were the other communist leaders in eastern Europe.
They worried that the new ideas might spread. Brezhnev came under
pressure from the East German and Polish leaders to clamp dow n on reform
in Czechoslovakia.
Through the summer the USSR tried various tactics to slow Dubcček dow n.
•  To intimidate the Czechs, Soviet, Polish and East German troops
performed public training exercises right on the Czech border.
•  It thought about imposing economic SANCTIONS – for example, cancelling
wheat exports to Czechoslovakia – bu t didn’t because it thought that the
Czechs would ask for help from the West.
•  In July the USSR held a summit conference with the Czechs. Dubcček
agreed not to allow a new Social Democratic Party. However, he insisted
on keeping most of his reforms. The tension seemed to ease.
Then on 20 A ugust 1968, t o the stunned amazement of the Czechs and the
outside world, Soviet tanks moved into Czechoslovakia. There was little
violent resistance. Dubcček was removed from pow er. Dubcček’s
experiment in SOCIALISM with a human face had not failed; it had simply
proved unacceptable to the other communist countries.
FOCUS TASK 6.2
Why was there opposition to Soviet control in
Czechoslovakia?
Use the text and Sources 8–10 to list the reasons for opposition to
soviet control in Czechoslovakia.
SOURCE 11
Yesterday troops from the Soviet Union, Poland, East Germany,
Hungary and Bulgaria crossed the frontier of Czechoslovakia …
The Czechoslovak Communist Party Central Committee regard this
act as contrary to the basic principles of good relations between
socialist states.
A Prague radio report, 21 August 1968.
SOURCE 12
The party and government leaders of the Czechoslovak Socialist
Republic have asked the Soviet Union and other allies to give the
Czechoslovak people urgent assistance, including assistance with
armed forces. This request was brought about … by the threat from
counter revolutionary forces …working with foreign forces hostile to
socialism.
A Soviet news agency report, 21 August
1968.
SOURCE 13
Czechs burning Soviet tanks in Prague,
August 1968.
SOURCE 14
A street cartoon in Prague.
Source Analysis
1  Explain how and why Sources 11 and 12 differ in their
interpretation of the Soviet intervention.
2  What is the message of Source 14?
Outcomes
Unlike Nagy in Hungary, Dubcček was not executed. But he was gradually
downgraded. First he was sent to be ambassador to Turkey, then expelled
from the Communist Party altogether. Photographs showing him as leader
were ‘censored’ (see page 128).
It was clear that reforming ideas were regarded as a threat to communist rule
by all of the communist leaders. We now know from a release of documents
from the Soviet archives that the suppression of Czechoslovakia was driven
just as much by other eastern European leaders (particularly Walter Ulbricht
of East Germany) as it was by Brezhnev. These leaders feared that their own
people would demand the same freedom that Dubcček had allowed in
Czechoslovakia.
The Brezhnev Doctrine
The Czechoslovak episode also gave rise to the BREZHNEV DOCTRINE. The
essentials of communism were defined as:
•  a one-party system
•  to remain a member of the Warsaw Pact.
SOURCE 15
When internal and external forces hostile to socialism attempt to
turn the development of any socialist country in the direction of the
capitalist system, when a threat arises to the cause of socialism in
that country, a threat to the socialist commonwealth as a whole – it
becomes not only a problem for the people of that country but also
a general problem, the concern of all socialist countries.
The Brezhnev Doctrine.
FOCUS TASK 6.3
How similar were the uprisings of 1956 and 1968?
One question which historians often consider is how similar the
uprisings of 1956 in Hungary and 1968 in Czechoslovakia actually
were. The table below gives you a number of ways to compare the
two events. Work through pages 132–135, make your own copy
then complete the table.
Here are a few points to help you get the table started, but you will
have to decide where they fit and add your own as well.
•  Abolish secret police
•  Around 200,000 fled the country
•  Because of the threat to leave the Warsaw Pact
•  Dubčcek downgraded
•  Fear that other states would demand the same freedoms
•  Less censorship
•  Pitched battles in the streets
•  Wanted a more human form of communism
•  Wanted free elections with more than one party
•  Withdraw Soviet troops
Revision Tip
You don’t need to learn this whole table but be sure you can
explain:
•  two ways in which the Hungarian and Czech uprisings were
similar
•  two ways in which they were different.
FOCUS TASK 6.4
How secure was Soviet control of Hungary and
Czechoslovakia?
Here are various events from the two invasions. For each event
decide where it should go on this line. Does it suggest that Soviet
control was weak, strong or somewhere in between?
There may be some events that you think could be used to support
either view. Whatever you decide you must include notes to explain
your decision.
Hungary
•  Imre Nagy forms new government
•  Khruschev sends in troops
•  Nagy imprisoned and executed
•  Nagy’s plans
•  Opposition to Rákosi
•  Rákosi not supported by Moscow
•  Rákosi removed
•  Rebellion
•  Soviet tanks move in and then withdraw
•  Two weeks of fierce street fighting
Czechoslovakia
•  Censorship eased in Czechoslovakia
•  Czech communist leaders were heavily criticised for corrupt and
incompetent rule
•  Plans to set up Social Democratic Party
•  USSR argued with Dubčcek to slow down the pace of reform
•  Troops carried out training exercises on the border of
Czechoslovakia
•  The USSR considered sanctions against Czechoslovakia but
feared they would not work
•  Tanks moved into Prague on 20 August 1968
•  There was little violent resistance in Czechoslovakia
•  Dubčcek was removed
•  The Brezhnev Doctrine
Case study 3: The Berlin Wall
You have already seen how Berlin was a battleground of the Cold War (see
Source 17). In 1961 i t also became the focus of the Soviet Union’s latest
attempt to maintain control of its east European satellites.
SOURCE 16
A 1959 Soviet cartoon – the caption was:
‘The socialist stallion far outclasses the
capitalist donkey.’
Source Analysis
1  Look at Source 16. What is the aim of this cartoon?
2  How might someone living in a communist country react to it?
The problem
The crushing of the Hungarian uprising (see page 132) had confirmed for
many people in eastern Europe that it was impossible to fight the
communists. For many, it seemed that the only way of escaping the repression
was to leave altogether. Some wished to leave eastern Europe for political
reasons – they hated the communists – while many more wished to leave for
economic reasons. As standards of living in eastern Europe fell further and
further behind the West, the attraction of going to live in a CAPITALIST state
was very great.
The contrast was particularly great in the divided city of Berlin. Living
standards were tolerable in the East, but just a few hundred metres away in
West Berlin, East Germans could see some of the prize exhibits of capitalist
West Germany – shops full of goods , great freedom, great wealth and great
variety. This had been done deliberately by the WESTERN POWERS. They had
poured massive investment into Berlin. East Germans could also watch West
German television.
In the 1950s  East Germans were still able to travel freely into West Berlin.
From there they could travel on into West Germany. It was very tempting to
leave East Germany, with its harsh communist regime and its hardline leader,
Walter Ulbricht. By the late 1950s  thousands were leaving and never coming
back (see Figure 18).
SOURCE 17
West Berlin … has many roles. It is more than a showcase of
liberty, an island of freedom in a Communist sea. It is more than a
link with the free world, a beacon of hope behind the iron curtain,
an escape hatch for refugees. Above all, it has become the resting
place of Western courage and will … We cannot and will not permit
the Communists to drive us out of Berlin.
President Kennedy speaking in 1960, before
he became president.
FIGURE 18
Number of people crossing from East to
West Germany, 1950–64.
Those who were defecting were very often highly skilled workers or well-
qualified managers. The communist government could not afford to lose these
high-quality people. More importantly, from Khrushchev’s point of view, the
sight of thousands of Germans fleeing communist rule for a better life under
capitalism undermined communism generally.
The solution
In 1961 t he USA had a new president, the young and inexperienced John F
Kennedy. Khrushchev thought he could bully Kennedy and chose to pick a
fight over Berlin. He insisted that Kennedy withdraw US troops  from the city.
He was certain that Kennedy would back dow n. Kennedy refused. However,
all eyes were now on Berlin. What would happen next?
At two o’clock in the morning on Sunday 13 A ugust 1961, E ast German
soldiers erected a barbed-wire barrier along the entire frontier between East
and West Berlin, ending all free movement from East to West. It was quickly
replaced by a concrete wall. All the crossing points from East to West Berlin
were sealed, except for one. This became known as CHECKPOINT CHARLIE.
Families were divided. Berliners were unable to go to work; chaos and
confusion followed. Border guards kept a constant look-out for anyone trying
to cross the wall. They had orders to shoot people trying to defect. Hundreds
were killed ove r the next three decades.
SOURCE 19
A section of the Berlin Wall.
SOURCE 20
East German security guards recover the
body of a man shot attempting to cross the
wall in 1962.
SOURCE 21
The Western powers in Berlin use it as a centre of subversive
activity against the GDR [the initial letters of the German name for
East Germany]. In no other part of the world are so many
espionage centres to be found. These centres smuggle their agents
into the GDR for all kinds of subversion: recruiting spies; sabotage;
provoking disturbances.
The government presents all working people of the GDR with a
proposal that will securely block subversive activity so that reliable
safeguards and effective control will be established around West
Berlin, including its border with democratic Berlin.
A Soviet explanation for the building of the
wall, 1961.
Outcomes
For a while, the wall created a major crisis. Access to East Berlin had been
guaranteed to the Allies since 1945. In October 1961 U S diplomats and
troops  crossed regularly into East Berlin to find out how the Soviets would
react.
On 27 O ctober Soviet tanks pulled up to Checkpoint Charlie and refused to
allow any further access to the East. All day, US and Soviet tanks, fully
armed, faced each other in a tense stand-off. Then, after eighteen hours, one
by one, five metres at a time, the tanks pulled back. Another crisis, another
retreat.
The international reaction was relief. Khrushchev ordered Ulbricht to avoid
any actions that would increase tension. Kennedy said, ‘It’s not a very nice
solution, but a wall is a hell of a lot better than a war.’ So the wall stayed,
and ove r the following years became the symbol of division – the division of
Germany, the division of Europe, the division of communist East and
democratic West. The communists presented the wall as a protective shell
around East Berlin. The West presented it as a prison wall.
SOURCE 22
There are some who say, in Europe and elsewhere, we can work
with the Communists. Let them come to Berlin.
President Kennedy speaking in 1963 after the
building of the Berlin Wall.
SOURCE 23
A Soviet cartoon from the 1960s. The sign
reads: ‘The border of the GDR (East
Germany) is closed to all enemies.’ Notice
the shape of the dog’s tail.
Revision Tip
You need to be able to give:
•  two reasons that the Soviet Union built the Berlin Wall
•  a full explanation of each reason.
FOCUS TASK 6.5
Why was the Berlin Wall built in 1961?
Stage 1
Work in pairs.
Make a poster or notice to be stuck on the Berlin Wall explaining
the purpose of the wall. One of you make a poster for the East
German side and the other make a poster for the West German
side. You can use pictures and quotations from the sources in this
chapter or use your own research.
Make sure you explain in your poster the reasons why the wall was
built and what the results of building the wall will be.
Stage 2
Discuss with your partner: Do you think the building of the Berlin
Wall shows that communist control of East Germany was weak or
that it was strong?
Choose pieces of evidence from the past three pages that could be
used to support either viewpoint and explain how it could be used
that way.
Case study 4: Solidarity in Poland,
1980–81
Throughout the years of communist control of Poland there were regular
protests. However, they were generally more about living standards and
prices than attempts to ove rthrow communist government. During the first
half of the 1970s  Polish industry performed well so the country was
relatively calm. But in the late 1970s  the Polish economy hit a crisis and
1979 w as the worst year for Polish industry since communism had been
introduced. This is what happened next.
SOURCE 24
•  More pay
•  End to censorship
•  Same welfare benefits as police and party workers
•  Broadcasting of Catholic church services
•  Election of factory managers
Some of Solidarity’s 21 demands.
July 1980The Government announced increases in the price of
meat.
August
1980Workers at the Gdansk shipyard, led by Lech Walesa,
put forward 21 demands to the Government, including
free TRADE UNIONS and the right to strike (see Source
24). They also started a free trade union called
SOLIDARITY. Poland had trade unions but they were
ineffective in challenging government policies.
30 August
1980The Government agreed to all 21 of Solidarity’s
demands.
September
1980Solidarity’s membership grew to 3.5 million.
October
1980Solidarity’s membership was 7 million. Solidarity was
officially recognised by the Government.
January
1981Membership of Solidarity reached its peak at 9.4
million – more than a third of all the workers in Poland.
Profile
Lech Walesa
•  Pronounced Lek Fowensa.
•  Born 1943. His father was a farmer.
•  He went to work in the shipyards at Gdansk.
•  In 1976 he was sacked from the shipyard for making ‘malicious’
statements about the organisation and working climate.
•  In 1978 he helped organise a union at another factory. He was
dismissed.
•  In 1979 he worked for Eltromontage. He was said to be the best
automotive electrician. He was sacked.
•  With others, he set up Solidarity in August 1980 and became its
leader.
•  He was a committed Catholic.
•  In 1989 he became the leader of Poland’s first non-communist
government since the Second World War.
Reasons for Solidarity’s success
You might be surprised that the Government gave in to Solidarity in 1980.
There are many different reasons for this.
•  The union was strongest in those industries that were most important to the
Government – shipbuilding and heavy industry. A GENERAL STRIKE in these
industries would have devastated Poland’s economy.
•  In the early stages the union was not seen by its members as an alternative
to the Communist Party. More than 1 million members (30 pe r cent) of the
Communist Party joined Solidarity.
•  Lech Walesa was very careful in his negotiations with the Government and
worked to avoid provok ing a dispute that might bring in the Soviet Union.
•  The union was immensely popu lar. Almost half of all workers belonged.
Lech Walesa was a kind of folk hero.
•  Solidarity had the support of the Catholic Church, which was still very
strong in Poland.
•  The Government was playing for time. It hoped Solidarity would break
into rival factions. Meanwhile the Government drew up plans for MARTIAL
LAW (rule by the army).
•  The Soviet Union also had half an eye on the West. Solidarity had gained
support in the West in a way that neither the Hungarian nor the Czech rising
had. Walesa was well known in the Western media and people in the West
bought Solidarity badges to show their support. The scale of the movement
ensured that the Soviet Union treated the Polish crisis cautiously.
Revision Tip
Make sure you know:
•  two demands made by Solidarity in 1980
•  one reason why Solidarity was crushed in 1981
•  one reason why you think the rise and fall of Solidarity is a
significant event in history.
Martial law
In February 1981 t he situation changed. The civilian prime minister
‘resigned’ and the leader of the army, General Jaruzelski, took over. From the
moment he took office, people in Poland, and obs ervers outside Poland,
expected the Soviet Union to ‘send in the tanks’ at any time, especially when
the Solidarity Congress produced an ‘open letter’ saying that they were
campaigning not only for their own rights but for the rights of workers
throughout the COMMUNIST BLOC. It proclaimed that the Poles were fighting
‘For Your Freedom and For Ours’.
Jaruzelski and Walesa negotiated to form a government of national
understanding but when that broke dow n in December, after nine months of
tense relationships, the communist Government acted. Brezhnev ordered the
Red Army to carry out ‘training manoeuvres’ on the Polish border. Jaruzelski
introduced martial law. He put Walesa and almost 10,000 ot her Solidarity
leaders in prison. He suspended Solidarity.
SOURCE 25
Inequality and injustice are everywhere. There are hospitals that
are so poorly supplied that they do not even have cotton, and our
relatives die in the corridors; but other hospitals are equipped with
private rooms and full medical care for each room. We pay fines
for traffic violations, but some people commit highway
manslaughter while drunk and are let off … In some places there
are better shops and superior vacation houses, with huge fenced-in
grounds that ordinary people cannot enter.
Extract from ‘Experience and the Future’, a
report drawn up in 1981 by Polish writers and
thinkers who were not members of the
Communist Party. They are describing the
inequality in Poland between Communist
Party members and ordinary people.
Think!
Between August 1980 and December 1981, Solidarity went through
some rapid changes. Choose two moments in this period that you
think were particularly important in the rise and fall of Solidarity and
explain why they were important.
Reasons for the crushing of Solidarity
Military DICTATORS are not required to give reasons for their actions. But if
they were, what might Jaruzelski have to say?
•  Solidarity was acting as a political party. The Government declared that it
had secret tapes of a Solidarity meeting setting up a new provisional
government – without the Communist Party.
•  Poland was sinking into chaos. Almost all Poles felt the impact of food
shortages. Rationing had been introduced in April 1981. Wages had
increased by less than INFLATION. Unemployment was rising.
•  Solidarity itself was also tumbling into chaos. There were many different
factions. Some felt that the only way to make progress was to push the
communists harder until they cracked under the pressure. Strikes were
continuing long after the Solidarity leadership had ordered them to stop.
The Soviet Union had seen enough. It thought the situation in Poland had gone
too far. If Poland’s leaders would not restore communist control in Poland,
then it would. This was something the Polish leaders wanted to avoid.
The significance of Solidarity
In the story of Soviet control of eastern Europe, Solidarity was significant for
a number of reasons:
•  It highlighted the failure of communism to provide good l iving standards
and this undermined communism’s claim to be a system which benefited
ordinary people.
•  It highlighted inefficiency and corruption (see Source 25 for example).
•  It showed that there were organisations which were capable of resisting a
communist government.
•  It showed that communist governments could be threatened by ‘PEOPLE
POWER’.
It also highlighted the nature of Soviet control. The only thing that kept the
communists in pow er was force or the threat of force backed by the USSR.
When Jaruzelski finally decided to use force, Solidarity was easily crushed.
The lesson was clear. If MILITARY FORCE was not used, then communist
control seemed very shaky indeed. If Soviet policy were to change,
communist control would not survive. What do y ou expect to happen next?
FIGURE 26
The results of an opinion poll in Poland,
November 1981. The people polled were
asked whether they had confidence in key
institutions in Poland. It is known that 11 per
cent of those polled were Communist Party
members.
FOCUS TASK 6.6
What was the significance of Solidarity for the decline of
Soviet influence in eastern Europe?
‘Solidarity died as quickly as it started, having achieved nothing.’
How far do you agree with this statement? Support your answer
with evidence from pages 140 and 141.
Enter Mikhail Gorbachev
Gorbachev became leader of the Soviet Union in 1985. He was an unusual
mix of IDEALIST, optimist and REALIST.
•  The realist in him could see that the USSR was in a terrible state. Its
economy was very weak. It was spending far too m uch money on the ARMS
RACE. It was locked into an unwinnable war in Afghanistan.
•  The idealist in Gorbachev believed that communist rule should make life
better for the people of the USSR and other communist states. As a loyal
communist and a proud Russian, he was offended by the fact that goods
made in Soviet factories were shoddy , living standards were higher in the
West and that many Soviet citizens had no loyalty to the Government.
•  The optimist in Gorbachev believed that a reformed communist system of
government could give people pride and belief in their country. He
definitely did not intend to dismantle communism in the USSR and eastern
Europe, but he did want to reform it radically.
Profile
Mikhail Gorbachev
•  Born 1931. One grandfather was a KULAK – a landowning
peasant – who had been sent to a prison camp by Stalin
because he resisted Stalin’s policy of COLLECTIVISATION. The other
grandfather was a loyal Communist Party member.
•  His elder brother was killed in the Second World War.
•  Studied law at Moscow University in the 1950s. Became a
persuasive speaker.
•  Worked as a local Communist Party official in his home area. By
1978 he was a member of the Central Committee of the party
and in charge of agriculture.
•  In 1980 he joined the POLITBURO.
•  He was a close friend of Andropov, who became Soviet leader in
1983. He shared many of Andropov’s ideas about reforming the
USSR. When Andropov was leader, he was effectively second in
command.
•  In 1985 he became leader of the USSR.
•  In October 1990 he was awarded the NOBEL PEACE PRIZE.
Gorbachev’s policies in eastern Europe
Gorbachev also had a very different attitude to eastern Europe from
Brezhnev. In March he called the leaders of the Warsaw Pact countries
together. This meeting should have been a turning point in the history of
eastern Europe. He had two messages.
‘We won’t intervene’
SOURCE 27
The time is ripe for abandoning views on foreign policy which are
influenced by an imperial standpoint. Neither the Soviet Union nor
the USA is able to force its will on others. It is possible to suppress,
compel, bribe, break or blast, but only for a certain period. From
the point of view of long-term big time politics, no one will be able
to subordinate others. That is why only one thing – relations of
equality – remains. All of us must realise this …
Gorbachev speaking in 1987.
Gorbachev made it very clear to the countries of eastern Europe that they
were responsible for their own fates. However, most of the Warsaw Pact
leaders were old-style, hardline communists. To them, Gorbachev’s ideas
were insane and they simply did not believe he meant what he said.
‘You have to reform’
Gorbachev also made it clear that they needed to reform their own countries.
He did not think communism was doom ed. In fact, he felt the oppos ite was
true. Gorbachev believed the communist system could provide better
healthcare, education and transport. The task in the USSR and eastern Europe
was to renew communism so as to match capitalism in other areas of public
life. However, they did not believe him on this count either.
In the next few year these leaders would realise they had made a serious
error of judgement.
Revision Tip
Identify two problems in the USSR that led to Gorbachev’s new
policy towards eastern Europe.
Think!
Why do you think the Warsaw Pact leaders did not believe
Gorbachev when he told them the Soviet Union would no longer
interfere in the internal affairs of other communist countries?
Gorbachev’s reforms
He had to be cautious, because he faced great oppos ition from hardliners in
his own Government, but gradually he declared his policies. The two key
ideas were G L A S N O S T (openness) and P E R E S T R O I K A (restructuring).
•  G l as nos t: He called for open debate on government policy and honesty in
facing up to problems. It was not a detailed set of policies but it did mean
radical change.
•  In 1987 h is pe r e s t r oi k a programme allowed market forces to be introduced
into the Soviet economy. For the first time in 60 y ears it was no longer
illegal to buy and sell for profit.
He then went on to:
•  Reduce defence spending: The nuclear arms race was an enormous drain
on the Soviet economy at a time when it was in trouble anyway. After
almost 50 y ears on a constant war footing, the Red Army began to shrink.
•  Improve international relations: Gorbachev brought a new attitude to the
USSR’s relations with the wider world. He withdrew Soviet troops  from
Afghanistan, which had become such a costly yet unwinnable war. In
speech after speech, he talked about international trust and CO-OPERATION
as the way forward for the USSR, rather than confrontation.
SOURCE 28
Polish, Hungarian and Romanian dogs get to talking. ‘What’s life
like in your country?’ the Polish dog asks the Hungarian dog.
‘Well, we have meat to eat but we can’t bark. What are things like
where you are from?’ says the Hungarian dog to the Polish dog.
‘With us, there’s no meat, but at least we can bark,’ says the Polish
dog.
‘What’s meat? What’s barking?’ asks the Romanian dog.
Example of anticommunist jokes collected by
researchers in eastern Europe in the 1980s.
SOURCE 29
A
The Soviet Union would remain a one party state even if the
Communists allowed an opposition party to exist. Everyone would
join the opposition party.
B
When American college students are asked what they want to do
after graduation, they reply: ‘I don’t know, I haven’t decided’.
Russian students answer the same question by saying: ‘I don’t
know, they haven’t told me’.
Anticommunist jokes told by US President
Reagan to Mikhail Gorbachev at their SUMMIT
MEETINGS in the late 1980s.
Source Analysis
1  Why do you think President Reagan was so fond of jokes like
those in Source 29A and B?
2  Do you think it is strange that Gorbachev was upset by these
jokes? Explain your answer.
3  Can jokes really be useful historical sources? Explain your
answer.
4  If you think jokes are useful sources, do you think the joke in
Source 28 is more or less useful than the jokes in Source 29?
Explain your answer.
Gorbachev and President Reagan
Ronald Reagan became US president in January 1981. He was president until
1988. He had only one policy towards the USSR – get tough. He criticised its
control over eastern Europe and increased US military spending. In a way,
Reagan’s toughness helped Gorbachev.
•  It was clear by the late 1980s  that the USSR could not compete with
American military spending. This helped Gorbachev to push through his
military spending cuts.
•  Reagan got on quite well with Gorbachev himself. As SUPERPOWER
relations improved, the USSR felt less threatened by the USA. This meant
there was less need for the USSR to control eastern Europe.
Implications for eastern Europe: ‘Listen to
your people’
As Gorbachev introduced his reforms in the USSR the demand rose for
similar reforms in eastern European states as well. Most people in these
states were sick of the poor  economic conditions and the harsh restrictions
that communism imposed. Gorbachev’s policies gave people some hope for
reform.
In July 1988 G orbachev made a speech to the leaders of the Warsaw Pact
countries. He planned to withdraw large numbers of troops , tanks and
aircraft from eastern Europe. Hungary was particularly eager to get rid of
Soviet troops  and, when pressed, Gorbachev seemed to accept this. In March
1989 h e made clear again that the Red Army would not intervene to prop up
communist regimes in eastern Europe. What followed was staggering.
The collapse of communism in eastern
Europe
People power
The western media came up with a phrase to explain the events on page 144
– people pow er. Communist control was toppled because ordinary people
were not prepared to accept it any longer. They took control of events. It was
not political leaders guiding the future of eastern Europe in 1989 bu t ordinary
people.
SOURCE 30
A demonstrator pounds away at the Berlin
Wall as East German border guards look on
from above, 4 November 1989. The wall was
dismantled five days later.
Source Analysis
Study Source 30. We are going to study the story in the source.
1  What is the man in the foreground doing?
2  Would this have been possible at an earlier date? Why?
3  Who are the men watching from above? Why is it significant that
they are just watching?
4  How would you summarise this scene: joyful? sad? powerful?
other words?
Now let’s think about the story of the source:
5  What is significant about the fact that the photographer was even
able to take this picture?
6  The photographer was probably a freelance photographer who
hoped to sell this picture to as many different newspapers as he
could. Do you think he would have been successful? Why?
7  Which countries would have been most likely to publish this
photograph? Why?
SOURCE 31
For most west Europeans now alive, the world has always ended at
the East German border and the Wall; beyond lay darkness … The
opening of the frontiers declares that the world has no edge any
more. Europe is becoming once more round and whole.
The Independent, November 1989.
Reunification of Germany
With the Berlin Wall dow n, West German CHANCELLOR Helmut Kohl
propos ed a speedy REUNIFICATION of Germany. Germans in both countries
embraced the idea enthusiastically.
Despite his idealism, Gorbachev was less enthusiastic. He expected that a
new united Germany would be friendlier to the West than to the East. But
after many months of hard negotiations, not all of them friendly, Gorbachev
accepted German reunification and even accepted that the new Germany
could become a member of NATO. This was no small thing for Gorbachev to
accept. Like all Russians, he lived with the memory that it was German
aggression in the Second World War that had cost the lives of 20 m illion
Soviet citizens.
On 3 October 1990, G ermany became a united country once again.
Revision Tip
Remember two examples of ‘people power’ weakening communist
control of eastern Europe in 1989–90.
The collapse of the USSR
Even more dramatic events were to follow in the Soviet Union itself.
1990
MARCH
•  Gorbachev visited the Baltic state of Lithuania – pa rt of the Soviet Union.
Its leaders put their views to him. They were very clear. They wanted
independence. They did not want to be part of the USSR. Gorbachev was
for once uncompromising. He would not allow this. But in March they did
it anyway.
•  Almost as soon as he returned to Moscow from Lithuania, Gorbachev
received a similar demand from the Muslim Soviet Republic of
Azerbaijan. What should Gorbachev do n ow? He sent troops  to
Azerbaijan to end rioting there. He sent troops  to Lithuania. But as the
summer approached, the crisis situation got worse.
MAY
•  The Russian Republic, the largest within the USSR, elected Boris Yeltsin
as its president. Yeltsin made it clear that he saw no future in a Soviet
Union. He said that the many REPUBLICS that made up the USSR should
become independent states.
JULY
•  Ukraine declared its independence. Other republics followed.
•  By the end of 1990 n obody  was quite sure what the USSR meant any
longer. Meanwhile, Gorbachev was an international superstar. In October
1990 G orbachev received the Nobel Peace Prize for his contribution to
ending the Cold War.
1991
APRIL
•  The Republic of Georgia declared its independence.
AUGUST
•  The USSR was disintegrating. Reformers within the USSR itself demanded
an end to the Communist Party’s dom ination of government. Gorbachev
was struggling to hold it together, but members of the communist elite had
had enough.
•  Hardline Communist Party members and leading military officers
attempted a COUP to take over the USSR. The plotters included
Gorbachev’s prime minister, Pavlov, and the head of the armed forces,
Dimitry Yazov. They held Gorbachev prisoner in his holiday home in the
Crimea. They sent tanks and troops  onto the streets of Moscow. This was
the old Soviet way to keep control. Would it work this time?
•  Huge crowds gathered in Moscow. They strongly oppos ed this military
coup. The Russian president, Boris Yeltsin, emerged as the leader of the
popu lar oppos ition. Faced by this resistance, the conspirators lost faith in
themselves and the coup collapsed.
•  This last-ditch attempt by the Communist Party to save the USSR had
failed. A few days later, Gorbachev returned to Moscow.
DECEMBER
•  Gorbachev might have survived the coup, bu t it had not strengthened his
position as Soviet leader. He had to admit that the USSR was finished and
he with it. In a televised speech on 25 D ecember 1991, G orbachev
announced his own resignation and the end of the Soviet Union (see Source
32).
Think!
Think of a suitable headline for each of the six ‘episodes’ in the
collapse of the USSR (shown as yellow bands in the table above).
The end of the Cold War
SOURCE 32
A sense of failure and regret came through his [Gorbachev’s]
Christmas Day abdication speech – especially in his sorrow over
his people ‘ceasing to be citizens of a great power’. Certainly, if
man-in-the-street interviews can be believed, the former Soviet
peoples consider him a failure.
History will be kinder. The Nobel Prize he received for ending the
Cold War was well deserved. Every man, woman and child in this
country should be eternally grateful.
His statue should stand in the centre of every east European
capital; for it was Gorbachev who allowed them their
independence. The same is true for the newly independent
countries further east and in Central Asia. No Russian has done
more to free his people from bondage since Alexander II who freed
the serfs.
From a report on Gorbachev’s abdication
speech, 25 December 1991, in the US
newspaper the Boston Globe.
Think!
Read Source 32 carefully. Three statements are in bold.
Do you agree or disagree with each statement? For each
statement, write a short paragraph to:
a)  explain what it means, and
b)  express your own view on it.
SOURCE 33
He had no grand plan and no predetermined policies; but if
Gorbachev had not been Party General Secretary, the decisions of
the late 1980s would have been different. The USSR’s long-lasting
order would have endured for many more years, and almost
certainly the eventual collapse of the order would have been much
bloodier than it was to be in 1991. The irony was that Gorbachev,
in trying to prevent the descent of the system into general crisis,
proved instrumental in bringing forward that crisis and destroying
the USSR.
Extract from History of Modern Russia by
historian Robert Service, published 2003. In
this extract he is commenting on the meeting
in March 1985.
SOURCE 34
Mikhail Gorbachev after receiving the Nobel
Peace Prize, 15 October 1990.
SOURCE 35
A cartoon by Doonesbury which appeared in
the Guardian on 13 June 1988.
FOCUS TASK 6.7
How far was Gorbachev personally responsible for the
collapse of control over eastern Europe?
You are making a documentary film called ‘The Collapse of the Red
Empire’ to explain the how and why of Soviet control of eastern
Europe. The film will be 60 minutes long.
1  Decide what proportion of this time should concentrate on:
    a)  people power
    b)  problems in the USSR
    c)  actions by Western leaders such as Reagan
    d)  actions of political leaders in eastern Europe
    e)  Mikhail Gorbachev.
2  Choose one of these aspects and summarise the important
points, stories, pictures or sources that your film should cover
under that heading.
FOCUS TASK 6.8
How secure was Soviet control of eastern Europe?
You now know a lot about Soviet control of eastern Europe:
•  how and why communists seized control of each country in the
1940s (Chapter 4)
•  how the Soviet Union successfully crushed opposition and threats
to control from the 1950s to the 1980s
•  how the communist regimes of eastern Europe and the USSR
collapsed so suddenly in 1989-90.
Here are the three graphs from page 129. Which do you think best
represents the story of Soviet control of eastern Europe?
If you pick Graph A, you think Soviet control stayed steady for
years, then collapsed in 1989.
If you pick Graph B, you think Soviet control gradually decreased
over time.
If you pick Graph C, you think Soviet control fluctuated in response
to various crises.
If you think none of them is right, draw your own instead. Explain
your graph using evidence from this chapter. You could refer back
to your work for Focus Tasks 6.3, 6.4 and 6.6 on pages 136 and
141.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Berlin Wall
•  Brezhnev Doctrine
•  Censorship
•  Checkpoint Charlie
•  Co-existence
•  Comecon
•  Cominform
•  Communism
•  Communist bloc
•  De-Stalinisation
•  Freedom of speech
•  Glasnost
•  Iron curtain
•  Martial law
•  NATO
•  Nobel Peace Prize
•  One-party state
•  People power
•  Perestroika
•  Politburo
•  Prague Spring
•  Red Army
•  Reunification
•  Secret police
•  Socialism
•  Solidarity
•  Soviet republics
•  Summit meeting
•  Superpower
•  Trade union
•  Warsaw Pact
Chapter Summary
The USSR and eastern Europe
  1  After the Second World War, communist governments were
elected or forced on most countries of eastern Europe.
  2  They were not directly ruled by the USSR but their communist
governments did what the USSR wanted and when they did not
the USSR sent troops and tanks (the Red Army) to force them
to follow the USSR’s wishes.
  3  Life in these countries was tightly controlled with censorship, a
secret police and all industry directed to meeting the needs of
the Soviet Union rather than making goods for ordinary people.
  4  The countries formed a military alliance called the Warsaw Pact
– the members would defend each other if any member was
attacked.
  5  In Hungary in 1956 the communist Government was very
unpopular and the people resented the lack of freedom. There
were demonstrations and protests. A new leader was chosen
(with Soviet approval) who promised greater freedom but when
he also decided to leave the Warsaw Pact the USSR changed
its mind and sent the Red Army to crush the rising.
  6  In 1961 an increasing number of people in communist East
Germany were leaving by crossing into capitalist West
Germany. The USSR responded by building the Berlin Wall –
and stopping all movement from East to West Berlin. It stayed
in place for 28 years and became a symbol of Cold War
tension.
  7  In Czechoslovakia in 1968 after mass protests the communist
Government tried to introduce more freedom for its people.
Again, the Soviet Union sent the Red Army to crush the
protests.
  8  In 1980 a trade union in Poland called Solidarity led a protest
movement against communist control that was tolerated to start
with until the army took over in Poland and Solidarity was
crushed.
  9  In 1985 Gorbachev became leader of the USSR. He believed
the USSR needed to change and he introduced two key ideas:
glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring).
10  He also told the communist governments of eastern Europe that
the USSR was no longer going to intervene to prop them up.
They were on their own. In 1988 he began to withdraw Soviet
troops from eastern Europe.
11  The impact of this was not immediately clear but by 1989
people in eastern Europe began to test what this meant in
practice. First of all Hungarians began to dismantle the barbed-
wire fence between Hungary and the West. Over the rest of the
summer of 1989 people acted similarly throughout eastern
Europe, culminating with the dismantling of the Berlin Wall (while
troops looked on) in November.
12  Gorbachev was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize for helping to
end the Cold War between the USA and the USSR but he was
not popular in the USSR. The USSR fragmented and he
resigned as leader on Christmas Day 1991.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  What were glasnost and perestroika? [4]
    (b)  Explain why Mikhail Gorbachev changed Soviet policy
towards eastern Europe. [6]
    (c)  ‘Gorbachev almost singlehandedly ended communist control
of eastern Europe.’ How far do you agree with this
statement? Explain your answer. [10]
2  Study Source 21 on page 138. How far do you think Source 21 is
a reliable source? Explain your answer using the source and your
own knowledge. [7]
3  Study Source 23 on page 139. Why was this source published at
this time? Explain your answer using details of the source and
your knowledge. [7]
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
7 Why did events in the Gulf
matter, c.1970–2000?
FOCUS POINTS
•  Why was Saddam Hussein able to come to power in Iraq?
•  What was the nature of Saddam Hussein’s rule in Iraq?
•  Why was there a revolution in Iran in 1979?
•  What were the causes and consequences of the Iran–Iraq War,
1980–88?
•  Why did the First Gulf War take place?

This is the front cover of P u n c h magazine in August 1990.
P u n c h was a satirical news magazine published in Britain from
the nineteenth century through into the 1990s. This shows
Saddam Hussein, leader of Iraq.
1  What impression does this give you of Saddam Hussein?
2  What is the message of this illustration?
In Chapters 4–6 you have been studying the development of the COLD WAR
and the impact of the SUPERPOWERS on countries and events around the world.
This chapter shifts the focus away from the superpowers onto the oil-rich
states around the Arabian Gulf (see map on page 152).
The region has seen rapid change over the past 40 y ears. There is a lot of
political tension within and between the Gulf states that has caused some
costly and ferocious wars, especially the Iran–Iraq War of 1980–88. It has
also drawn into the conflict many outside nations: the First Gulf War of 1991
saw a multinational force of 35 di fferent countries at war with Saddam
Hussein’s Iraq.
Your first task in this chapter will be to understand why the Gulf has been the
source of such tension. It would easy to focus it all on individuals such as
Saddam Hussein (pictured oppos ite) or on the importance of oil. As you will
see those are both very important but there are also other factors at work.
Your second task is to think about why these events matter so much to so
many people. It should be obvi ous that they matter to people living in the
region, but they have also mattered a lot to people living far away from the
Gulf states. WESTERN POWERS have got involved in wars much more readily
than they have in conflicts in other parts of the world. Why did events in the
Gulf matter to them?
Timeline
The timeline on the right gives you an overview of the main events you will
be studying in this chapter. You will be focusing on two countries in
particular, Iran and Iraq.

Think!
Here are five factors that have created tension and conflict in the
Gulf 1970–2000. They are closely connected with each other.
1  Write each on a separate card.
2  Write a sentence or a few phrases on each card to summarise
the main points.
3  Put them in rank order to show what you expect to be the main
causes of tension.
At the end of the chapter you can return to your prediction to see if
you changed your mind and why.
FIGURE 1

Map showing the main countries and key
features of the Gulf region. All the states
named are Arab except Iran and Turkey.
Reasons for tension in the Gulf
Individuals
The other panels show underlying causes of tension. It is usually
people who turn these tensions into actual conflicts. The different
leaders of the Gulf states, in particular Saddam Hussein and
AYATOLLAH Khomeini, have each played their part in raising
tension at different times.
Religion
The vast majority of the people in this area are Muslims.
However, there is a huge split between SUNNI and SHIA Muslims.
The origins of this split are explained in the Factfile on the
opposite page. Disagreement between these two branches of
Islam has been a major cause of conflict throughout this period.
Oil
All the states round the Persian Gulf produce oil; in fact, the Gulf
region contains nearly two-thirds of the world’s known oil
reserves. The Gulf countries are almost entirely dependent on oil
for their wealth. Many countries in the West and in the Far East
are also highly dependent on imports of oil from the Gulf. Without
it, much of their transport systems and manufacturing industry
would break down. Control of oil supplies played a major part in
the Iran–Iraq War of 1980–88 and was the central cause of the
Gulf War of 1991.
Israel
Not far from the Gulf is the state of Israel – the Jewish state
created in 1948 and carved out of land inhabited by Arabs. The
creation of the state of Israel was opposed by all Arab states,
including those in the Gulf, and Israel has been a source of
tension ever since.
National identity
The two countries you will be focussing on most are Iran and
Iraq. One is Arab while the other is not. They are both ancient
civilisations dating back thousands of years. Their people are
independent and proud of who they are and where they have
come from. Yet for much of their history the area has been
controlled by foreign empires. While outsiders might care most
about oil, many Iranians and Iraqis care more about their
country, their identity and their religion than they do about money
or oil. This has sometimes brought them into conflict with foreign
powers or with rulers who co-operate with them.
Why was Saddam Hussein able to
come to power in Iraq?
Ancient Iraq
Iraq lies in the ancient land of Mesopotamia, one of the world’s oldest
civilisations. The first cities were built here, the most famous of which was
Baghdad.
Many centuries later, in the seventh century AD, the land of Iraq was invaded
by the Arabs and its people adopted the language, Arabic, and the religion,
Islam, of the invaders.
Factfile
Baath Party
•  The BAATH PARTY had originally been established in Syria in the
1950s but its influence extended to several Arab countries,
including Iraq.
•  Baath means ‘Renaissance’ or rebirth of Arab power.
•  The Baathists called for unity among Arabs throughout the Middle
East. This was known as ARAB NATIONALISM.
•  In Iraq, they were mainly supported because they demanded a
strong stand against foreign interference in the affairs of Iraq.
The British mandate
By 1900, t he area that we now think of as Iraq was actually three provinces
of the Turkish Empire. At the end of the First World War the Turkish Empire
was broken up. Under the Treaty of Sevres (see page 24) the three provinces
were run by the British, who were keen to exploit Iraq’s rich oil reserves.
This was a bitter blow to Iraqi nationalists who wanted independence for
Iraq. In 1920 t hey rebelled against British rule. The British crushed the
uprising but, in doing so, they aroused even more bitterness.
King Faisal
The British soon realised they could not run the country on their own. They
needed collaborators: Iraqis who were willing to run the country in
partnership with them. So in 1921, t hey invited Faisal, member of a leading
Arab family in the Middle East, to become King of Iraq and head of a new
government. However, the country was far from independent. The British:
•  kept control of Iraq’s foreign policy and kept two airbases (near Basra and
Baghdad)
•  controlled the oil through the British-owned Iraqi Petroleum Company.
Discontent
The monarchy lasted 35 y ears. During this time Iraq saw considerable
economic development. Education also improved. However, there was much
discontent:
•  Inequality: the country was dom inated by a small number of big
landowners while the vast majority of the popu lation was very poor .
•  Israel: Britain supported the new Jewish state of Israel in 1948 a gainst the
oppos ition of the Arab states.
•  Control of oil: in 1952, t he Iraqi Petroleum Company agreed to share its
profits equally with the Iraqi Government. However, the company still
controlled production and prices.
Factfile
Sunni and Shiite Muslims
•  All Muslims, whose religion is Islam, believe in Allah (God). They
believe that Muhammad, born in Mecca (in today’s Saudi Arabia
in AD 572), is the messenger and prophet of Allah.
•  The Sunni–Shiite difference originated with a major disagreement
over who should succeed Muhammad as the Caliph, or leader (in
Arabic, it literally means deputy or successor) of the Muslim
world.
•  Ali, the cousin and son-in-law of Muhammad, believed he should
be leader and he was recognised as Caliph in Iraq and Persia
(modern Iran). But the Muslim rulers in Syria chose another
successor.
•  This led to division and warfare amongst Muslims, with the
creation of two groups: the Shia, or Shiite, Muslims who followed
Ali, and the Sunni Muslims.
•  Most Arabs became Sunni Muslims while the Arabs of southern
Iraq and the (non-Arab) Persians became Shiite Muslims.
Republic
In 1958 t he monarchy was overthrown and Iraq became a REPUBLIC. After
another COUP by army officers in 1968 t he republic was ruled by the Baath
Party. Most Baathists were Sunni Muslims. The Sunnis had been the
dominant group in Iraq ever since the state of Iraq was set up in 1921,
although the Shiites formed the majority of the popu lation. Many Shiites were
now brought into the new government in a show of unity.
The rise of Saddam Hussein
One of the Baathists who had played a key role in the 1958 r evolution and
the 1968 t ake-over was Saddam Hussein. As a young man, Saddam had been
immersed in the anti-British, anti-Western atmosphere of the Arab world in
the late 1950s  and the 1960s . He was made vice-president, serving under a
much older president. Within ten years he was the dom inant figure in Iraq.
How was he able to do t his?
Profile
Saddam Hussein
•  Born in 1937 into a poor peasant family in Takrit, near Baghdad.
•  He was named Saddam and is always referred to by this name.
•  He never knew his father, who disappeared before he was born,
and he was brought up by his uncle.
•  He failed to gain admission to the military academy and, at the
age of 20, he became a Baath Party activist.
•  In 1963 he became head of the Iraqi Intelligence Services.
•  He was vice-president from 1968 until 1979 when he became
president.
•  As president, he was ruthless in eliminating his rivals.
•  Many of his closest advisers came from the same Takrit clan as
he did and several members of his close family, including his two
sons, held important posts in government.
•  In 1980, he went to war with neighbouring Iran. The war was to
last for eight years yet, two years after it ended, his forces
invaded Kuwait.
•  In 2003, his Government was overthrown by invading US forces
and, in 2006, he was executed, after trial by an Iraqi court, for
crimes against humanity.
A strong power base
To begin with, he made sure that he had control of key positions within the
ruling Baath Party and he also controlled the most important departments in
the government and the army. You can see how he did this in the Factfile. In
Iraq, family and tribal connections were (and still are) a very important
source of pow er. Saddam placed family and friends in positions of pow er.
The other main source of pow er in Iraq was the army. Saddam placed friends
and allies in important positions here, too. He also kept the military
commanders happy by spending on defence.
Popularity
In 1972, t he Government nationalised, and took complete control of, the Iraqi
oil industry, despite the oppos ition of the British. This was a daring and
popu lar move. Saddam used Iraq’s oil wealth to build up education, health
and welfare services that were among the best in the Arab world.
Then, in 1973, t he Iraqis joined other Arab oil-producing states in reducing
oil production and sales to Western countries. This was done to punish the
West, for supporting Israel in a war against the Arab states of Egypt and
Syria. However, it also had the effect of driving up oil prices by 400 pe r
cent. Iraq’s income from oil was to rise from $575 m illion in 1972 t o
$26,500 m illion in 1980.
As the country became richer, Saddam improved the national economy:
electricity was extended to the countryside; agriculture was increasingly
mechanised; and roads, bridges, hospitals, schools and dams were built. The
Iraqis became more educated and healthcare improved.
Control
Saddam and the Baathists became much more pow erful, extending their
control over Iraqi government and society. TRADE UNIONS, schools and even
sports clubs came under state control. Membership of the Baath Party was
essential to be appointed to pos itions in the government. The main aim of
education was to promote Arab unity and ‘love of order’ and to reject
Western influences.
SOURCE 2
In July 1969 another eighty prominent Iraqis were on trial for
espionage. They were merely the prelude to thousands of
hangings, almost all for ‘espionage’ and ‘spying’. Eleven years
later, when Saddam Hussein was confirmed in power, Iraqi
hangmen were dispatching victims to the gallows at the rate of a
hundred every six weeks.
From The Great War for Civilisation: The
Conquest of the Middle East by Robert Fisk,
who has lived in, and reported from, the
Middle East for over 30 years.
Repression
In 1976, S addam was made a general in the army. By now he was the
effective leader of Iraq as the President became increasingly frail. Saddam
extended government control over the army and the SECRET POLICE. High
military spending kept the armed forces happy, but they were also kept under
control by regular indoctrination and by the imprisonment and execution of
those suspected of disloyalty.
Repression was extended throughout Iraqi society. There were increasing
reports of torture and rape of those held in prison. The secret police, under
Saddam’s control, came to dom inate both the army and the Baath Party. Most
of its recruits came from rural, tribal areas in the Sunni-dominated region to
the north and west of Baghdad and many were from Saddam’s own tribe. In
1979, S addam Hussein forced the ailing President to resign and he formally
became president of Iraq.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain:
•  at least one reason why Saddam had support inside Iraq
•  one way in which he opposed Western countries
•  one way in which he made sure he did not have rivals.
FOCUS TASK 7.1
Why was Saddam Hussein able to come to power in Iraq?
1  Work in pairs or groups. Create cards which set out the key
factors that brought Saddam to power: power base; popularity;
control; repression. Write each one on a separate card.
2  On the back of each card, note down as briefly as you can how
Saddam made use of each factor.
3  Look for connections between the factors on your cards.
4  Now use your cards to help you write an essay (of 150–300
words) in answer to the question. It could consist of four main
paragraphs, beginning like this:
    a)  He built up a strong power base.
    b)  He pursued policies which made him popular.
    c)  He shaped and controlled Iraqi life.
    d)  He used indoctrination and terror to control people.
5  Finally, in a conclusion, decide which of the reason(s) are most
important and explain why.
What was the nature of Saddam
Hussein’s rule in Iraq?
Once he took pow er, Saddam held on to it for another 25 y ears, despite
several plots against him and defeats in two wars. Becoming president in
1979 di d not mark any change in policy. In many ways he continued to rule
Iraq in similar ways to those he had used before 1979. He combined the
‘stick’ of terror, and indoctrination, with the ‘carrot’ of social and
infrastructure improvements. But the big change was that each aspect was
taken to a new level. He was very skilful in exploiting rivalries between
different groups in Iraq to divide his enemies. When he came to pow er in
1979 h e carried out a brutal purge of anyone who might be a threat to him.
Around 500 m embers of his own party were executed. Many more were
arrested or fled the country.
‘Show trials’
Saddam was an admirer of STALIN’S use of terror to enforce submission.
Saddam’s presidency started with the televised trial of a number of
oppon ents; 21 w ere later executed. There had always been repression, but
Saddam raised the level, terrorising his own party as well as oppon ents.
Baath Party members faced the death penalty for joining another party. There
were many attempts to ove rthrow Saddam and they were met with
overwhelming violence. After an attempt to assassinate him in the village of
Dujail to the north of Baghdad in 1982, h e ordered his security forces to kill
nearly 150 vi llagers in retaliation.
The cult of leadership
Saddam became more aggressive towards Israel. He condemned Egypt for
making a peace treaty with Israel in 1979. At home Saddam was glorified by
the media, who por trayed him as the leader and protector of the Arab world
as well as his own people. There were statues of him everywhere, his
portraits hung in all public buildings and his birthday was made a national
holiday. When a referendum was held on his presidency, 99 pe r cent of Iraqis
voted in support.
SOURCE 3

A poster of Saddam Hussein published in Iraq
in 1989.
Source Analysis
1  What image of Saddam Hussein is conveyed by the poster in
Source 3?
2  Why do you think this was published in 1989?
The Kurds
Iraq’s popu lation was made up of three main groups: Shia Muslims (the
majority), Sunni Muslims and Kurds. Ever since the state of Iraq was created
in 1921, t he Kurds had enjoyed a certain amount of self-rule, but many of
their leaders were determined to achieve a separate homeland, Kurdistan.
However, Saddam wanted the oppos ite. He was determined to extend hi s
Government’s control over the Kurdish north.
In 1974–75, h is forces attacked the Kurds. Many of their leaders were
executed or driven into exile and the Kurds lost much of their self-
government. The Kurds stood l ittle chance but they did get help from Iran.
Iranian help increased when Iran and Iraq went to war in 1980 ( see page
162). As a result the Kurds gained greater control of Kurdish northern Iraq.
Saddam saw this as a betrayal. In March 1988 S addam’s planes bom barded
the Kurdish town of Halabja using CHEMICAL WEAPONS (see Source 4). This
was one of the episodes for which Saddam Hussein was later put on trial,
found guilty and executed.
Factfile
The Kurds
•  The Kurds form about 20 per cent of the population of Iraq.
•  They are mostly situated in the north, especially along the
borders with Syria, Turkey and Iran (see Figure 1 on page 152).
•  There are millions of Kurds inside these neighbouring countries
as well as in Iraq itself. However, the Iraqi Kurds were probably
the most organised.
•  The Kurds are Muslim but not Arab and they speak a different
language.
•  There had been almost constant conflict between Iraqi troops
and Kurdish nationalist fighters from the time the state of Iraq
was created in 1921.
•  Since the end of the monarchy in 1958, some Kurds and many
Shiites had done well and become better off in Iraq as long as
they proved loyal. But, under Saddam, there were mass
expulsions.
Saddam’s solution to the ‘Kurdish problem’
When the war with Iran ended in July 1988, S addam decided to solve the
‘Kurdish problem’ once and for all. He set out to depopu late much of the
Kurdish north and destroy the Kurdish nationalist movement. His cousin,
later nicknamed ‘Chemical Ali’ by the Kurds, was put in charge. Saddam’s
forces used chemical weapons and carried out mass executions as well as
bulldozing villages. About 180,000 K urds were killed and at least another
100,000 r efugees fled into neighbouring Turkey. It was not until the first Gulf
War that the situation of the Kurds improved (see page 168).
SOURCE 4
Dead bodies – human and animal – littered the streets, huddled in
doorways, slumped over the steering wheels of their cars.
Survivors stumbled around, laughing hysterically, before
collapsing. Those who had been directly exposed to the gas found
that their symptoms worsened as the night wore on. Many children
died along the way and were abandoned where they fell.
An eyewitness account quoted in T.
McDowall, A Modern History of the Kurds, p.
358.
SOURCE 5
Some groups of prisoners were lined up, shot from the front, and
dragged into pre-dug mass graves; others were made to lie down
in pairs, sardine-style, next to mounds of fresh corpses, before
being killed; still others were tied together, made to stand on the tip
of the pit, and shot in the back so that they would fall forward into it.
Bulldozers then pushed earth or sand loosely over the heaps of
corpses.
From a report gathered by the pressure
group Human Rights Watch, and based on
the testimonies of several eyewitnesses.
Source Analysis
How far do Sources 4 and 5 agree about the treatment of the Kurds
by Iraqi forces?
Repression of the Shiite Iraqis
Shiites, who form the majority of the popu lation in the south and centre of
Iraq, continued to suffer persecution under Saddam Hussein’s rule. In the
early days of Baath rule, some had prospered. Many of the rank-and-file
Baath Party members were Shiite. Most Shiites wanted greater i nc l us i on in
Iraqi government and society, not the s e par at i s m that many Kurds wanted.
However, after the Islamic revolution in neighbouring Shiite Iran in 1979
(see page 159), Saddam became increasingly suspicious of the Shiite
majority in Iraq. In 1980–81, 200,000 S hiites were deported to Iran as their
‘loyalty was not proven’. Many of them were successful businessmen whose
businesses were then handed ove r to the Government’s supporters.
Infrastructure
At the same time Saddam continued to use Iraq’s immense oil revenue to
improve the health, education and other services for the people of Iraq. As
you have already read, he brought electricity and similar improvements to
rural villages. Daily life for many ordinary Iraqis improved due to improved
road transport and water supplies. Access to university education and high-
quality healthcare was free. Painters, musicians and other artists, helped by
government subsidies, flourished. Saddam even introduced penalties for
avoiding literacy classes and bullied his own ministers to lose weight to set
an example to the people. There was freedom of religious worship and
government in Iraq was relatively free from corruption. However, all of
these benefits depended on people not getting on the wrong side of the
regime.
Revision Tip
Saddam Hussein maintained his hold on power by use of terror and
indoctrination and by crushing the opposition. Make sure you can
remember examples of how:
•  he crushed opposition
•  he used the cult of personality
•  some Iraqis benefited from Saddam’s rule
•  Shiites suffered.
FOCUS TASK 7.2
What was the nature of Saddam Hussein’s rule in Iraq?
Divide into groups. Each group should take one of the following
themes and build up a detailed picture of this aspect of Saddam’s
rule.
•  Use of terror, especially in his treatment of non-Sunni peoples in
Iraq.
•  Indoctrination and the cult of leadership, for example, his
control of education and his portrayal as a national and Arab
hero.
•  Development of Iraq’s infrastructure, i.e. the facilities,
services and communications needed for the country to function
properly.
You might also think of things which do not fit easily into any of
these categories (such as Saddam giving preferential treatment to
people from his own clan or region), or which would be appropriate
in more than one category.
Now write an essay of 200–400 words to answer the question:
‘Terror, and terror alone, explains Saddam Hussein’s success in
holding on to power.’ How far do you agree with this interpretation?
Why was there a revolution in Iran in
1979?
You are now going to leave Iraq for a while, to study what was going on in
Iraq’s neighbour Iran. The events overlap with those you have already
studied.
Iran and the British
At the start of the twentieth century, Iran was ruled by a Shah. Iran was an
independent country (not part of anyone’s empire) but its oil fields were
controlled by a British company (Anglo-Iranian Oil) that paid the Shah’s
Government for the right to ope rate them.
After the Second World War, an increasing number of Iranians demanded that
their Government take control of the oil fields. They insisted that Iranians
should receive at least half of the oil profits. The leading Iranian nationalist
Mohammed Mossadeq said: ‘The oil resources of Iran, like its soil, its rivers
and mountains, are the property of the people of Iran.’
He gained huge popu lar support and, in 1951, t he Shah made him prime
minister. The Iranian Parliament then passed a law to nationalise the oil
industry. This defiant move thrilled the Iranians. Many in the Arab world
also applauded and Mossadeq became a hero to millions, both in and beyond
Iran.
In retaliation, the British company withdrew its workforce and refused to
allow any of its technicians to work with the new Iranian National Oil
Company. The British also persuaded other Western oil companies not to buy
Iran’s oil and the British navy imposed a blockade of Iran’s ports, refusing to
allow any ships to enter or leave.
SOURCE 6
A photograph of demonstrators in Iran
carrying images of Mossadeq and supporting
his demands to limit the power of the Shah.
Source Analysis
What does Source 6 reveal about the reputation of Mossadeq in
Iran?
The overthrow of Mossadeq’s Government,
1953
Iran’s income from oil sales dwindled but Mossadeq remained hugely
popu lar for standing up to the West. The British persuaded the USA to join
them in overthrowing Mossadeq. They played on America’s fear of
COMMUNISM. This was at the height of the COLD WAR. Iran had a long border
with Soviet Russia. What might happen if the SOVIET UNION extended its
influence into Iran and even got its hands on Iran’s oil?
So, under pressure from the Americans and the British, the Shah dismissed
Mossadeq and replaced him with a more pro-Western prime minister.
Mossadeq was put on trial and imprisoned and the Iranian Parliament was
closed dow n.
Think!
Here are some of the consequences of the 1953 coup. It:
•  increased the security of the West’s oil supplies
•  made Soviet interference in Iran less likely
•  overturned a popular, democratic government
•  led to Western companies securing 40 per cent of the profits
from Iranian oil
•  led to Iran becoming a close ally of the West.
1  Reorder these results in terms of how beneficial they were to
the people of Iran.
2  Reorder them again in terms of how beneficial they were to the
West.
3  Decide who benefitted most from the coup in 1953. Make sure
you can give reasons for your answer.
Following this coup:
•  A group of Western oil companies agreed with the Shah to restart
production in return for a 40 pe r cent share in Iran’s oil profits.
•  The Shah’s new Government joined Britain, Turkey and Iraq in an anti-
Soviet ALLIANCE. For the West, the Shah was a useful ally in the Middle
East.
•  The Shah made some reforms – he transferred some of Iran’s land from the
biggest landowners to poor er farmers; he gave women the vote; he
improved education, but there was still a vast contrast between the rich
elite and the poor  masses.
Opposition to the Shah
In the 1970s  the Shah faced increasing oppos ition, led by the MULLAHS
(Muslim religious leaders). In the mosques the mullahs criticised the wealth,
luxury and corruption of the Shah and his supporters.
They also criticised the Shah’s close relations with the non-Muslim West.
Many saw the Shah as a pawn in the hands of the USA, being exploited for
American gain. He even supported the existence of the state of Israel. The
mullahs encouraged street demonstrations, which targeted banks, because of
their close ties to Western companies, or cinemas which showed mostly
foreign, often sexual, films. These were felt to be unIslamic.
In response, the Shah’s secret police arrested, exiled, imprisoned and
tortured thousands of the Government’s critics, including mullahs. The
outstanding leader of the oppos ition was Ayatollah Khomeini, a leading
Muslim scholar. Like many other Muslim religious leaders, he had been
forced into exile by the Shah’s Government. At first, in 1964, h e went to
Turkey, later Iraq and, finally, Paris. From here, his writings and speeches
were smuggled into Iran
Revision Tip
Make sure you can:
•  describe British involvement in Iran’s oil industry
•  describe what the USA and UK did in 1953
•  explain two reasons why the British and Americans toppled
Mossadeq.
The Islamic Revolution 1979
In 1978, t here were huge strikes and demonstrations calling on the Shah to
abdicate. In September 1978, t he Government introduced military rule and,
the next day, troops  killed ove r 500 pe ople in a massive demonstration. In
October, there was a wave of strikes which brought most industry, including
oil production, to a halt.
By the end of 1978 s ome soldiers were refusing to fire on crowds. Many of
them, especially conscripts, sympathised with the protestors.
In January 1979, t he Shah left Iran in order to receive treatment for cancer.
He never returned. Instead, the 76-year-old Khomeini returned in triumph
amid huge celebrations, and declared an Islamic Revolution. The Shah’s last
prime minister fled the country and most of the army declared support for the
revolution. A national referendum produced a large majority in favour of
abolishing the monarchy and establishing an Islamic republic.
SOURCE 7
Ayatollah Khomeini waving to a crowd of
enthusiastic supporters on his return to
Tehran, February 1979.
SOURCE 8
Numerous eyewitnesses have commented on the almost universal
enthusiasm, discipline, mutual cooperation and the organisation
which added to the spirit and extent of the last months of the
revolution and distributed supplies and heating oil during the
revolutionary strikes.
Written in 2003 by historian Nikki Keddie, an
expert on Iranian history who has written
several books, over 40 years, on the subject.
Source Analysis
Study Sources 7 and 8.
1  Do they prove that ordinary Iranians supported the revolution?
2  Is one source more convincing as evidence than the other?
FOCUS TASK 7.3
Extravagance in a country where many are poor
Foreign films
Pro-Western foreign policy
Strikes and demonstrations
Banks closely tied to the West
Role of Khomeini
Hatred of the secret police
Importance of mullahs and mosques
Huge Western profits from oil
Killing of protestors led to bigger demonstrations and more
strikes
Why was there a revolution in Iran in 1979?
1  Here are some factors which help to explain the 1979 revolution.
Work in groups to decide how the factors could be grouped, and
also how some factors are connected to each other. Possible
groups might be:
    •  dislike of Western influence
    •  religious leaders’ opposition to the Shah
    •  the Shah’s attitude towards opponents.
You can probably think of other groupings – remember that
some factors may be relevant to more than one group.
2  Use the results of your sorting exercise to write an essay to
answer this question: ‘The main reason for the revolution in Iran
in 1979 was the Shah’s close relations with the West.’ To what
extent do you agree with this view?
    •  It is probably best to start by selecting reasons that support
this view and explain why they are important.
    •  Then select other reasons, some of which may also be
connected to the Shah’s close relations with the West. This
second part of your answer will contain more short-term
reasons such as the growing opposition in the late 1970s.
    •  Finally, you need to make a judgement about the extent to
which the Shah’s overthrow was a result of his closeness to
the West.
Revision Tip
The Shah’s Government was overthrown because of its unpopular,
pro-Western policies and replaced by an Islamic republic. Make
sure you can remember the role of the following in overthrowing the
Shah:
•  Ayatollah Khomeini
•  anti-Western feeling/opinion
•  injustices and inequalities in Iran.
The establishment of an Islamic state
Despite the huge support for the Ayatollah, there were other groups
competing for pow er in Iran. For instance, there was the Communist Party
and there were middle-class liberals who wanted a Western-style
DEMOCRACY. However, it was Ayatollah Khomeini’s supporters, organised in
the Islamic Republican Party, who came to dom inate Parliament and hold key
positions in the Government. Although Khomeini was not president or prime
minister, he held ultimate pow er as the ‘supreme leader’ of Shiite Iran. He
had the final say in government and law-making. New laws, based on the
Koran, the Muslim holy book , were passed: education was purged of
unIslamic influences; women had to cover their heads in public; and alcohol,
Western pop m usic and most Western films were banned. There were also
mass trials of the Shah’s former supporters and many were executed.
Khomeini and his Government were keen to spread the Islamic revolution to
what they saw as the corrupt, unIslamic regimes in other parts of the Muslim
world. Above  all, they denounced the ties which bound other states to the
West.
Profile
Ayatollah Khomeini
•  Born in 1902, he was brought up by his mother following the
murder of his father in 1903. He had a traditional religious
education.
•  He spent much of his life studying, writing and teaching Islamic
law, philosophy and ethics.
•  Became an ayatollah in the early 1920s. The term ‘ayatollah’ is
used by Shia Muslims to refer to the most senior religious
scholars.
•  From 1964 to 1979 Khomeini lived in exile.
•  He was popular in Iran for his opposition to both the Shah and his
dependence on the USA, and for his simple lifestyle and
language and his religious beliefs.
•  He reminded people that Muhammad, the founder of Islam, had
established and ruled over an Islamic state in Arabia in the
seventh century AD. In other words, Muhammad had been a
political as well as a religious leader. As Khomeini said: ‘Islam is
politics or it is nothing.’
The storming of the US embassy, November
1979
The USA, the former ally of the Shah, was seen as the main enemy in Iran and
came to be known as ‘the Great Satan’. When the US Government allowed
the Shah into America to receive medical treatment in November 1979,
Iranian students stormed the US embassy in Tehran, and took 50 of  the
American staff as hostages. The US Government declared Iran to be an
international ‘outlaw’. Yet millions in the Muslim world, bot h Arab and non-
Arab, admired Khomeini for standing up to the West.
Meanwhile, neighbouring Iraq was a prime target for the export of the
Islamic revolution. It had a completely secular, non-religious government and
a growing religious oppos ition. It also had a large Shiite popu lation, who
were excluded from top pos itions in government. Khomeini accused the Iraq
Government of being ‘atheist’ and ‘corrupt’ and, in one of his broadcasts to
the people of Iraq, he called on them to: ‘Wake up and topple this corrupt
regime in your Islamic country before it is too late.’
ACTIVITY
It is December 1979. You are a Western journalist who has been
asked to review the first twelve months of the Islamic republic for
people who know very little about it. Structure your article under the
following headings:
1  Why was an Islamic government established?
2  How is it governed? e.g. is it democratic or a one-party state? Is
there a parliament?
3  Who is Khomeini and what is his role?
4  What reforms have been passed?
5  What next? What are its policies towards:
    a)  other Muslim countries
    b)  the USA?
Revision Tip
Make sure you can:
•  describe two aims of the Khomeini regime
•  explain one reason why it was hostile to the USA
•  give an example of one other country in the region which might
be concerned about the new regime.
What were the causes and
consequences of the Iran–Iraq War,
1980–88?
In 1980 S addam Hussein decided to invade Iran. Why did he do this?
•  The Iranian leader, Ayatollah Khomeini, had called on Iraqis to rise up and
overthrow Saddam Hussein. The majority of Iraq’s popu lation were Shiite
Muslims whereas Saddam and his allies were Sunni Muslims. Saddam
saw Khomeini’s influence as a potentially very serious threat.
•  Saddam had evidence that Iran was involved in the assassination of
leading members of the Baath Party in Iraq. He feared they were now
plotting to ove rthrow him as well.
•  Saddam saw an oppor tunity to gain valuable territory.
    −  As you can see from Figure 1 Iraq’s access to the sea was very narrow
while Iran had a long coastline and several ports through which to
export its oil (see map in Figure 12). Iraq wanted to gain complete
control of the Shatt al-Arab waterway to gain a secure outlet to the sea.
    −  At the same time Saddam thought he might be able to seize parts of oil-
rich, south-west Iran.
•  Iran was weak so now seemed the ideal time to attack.
    −  Its economy was in chaos following the fall of the Shah’s regime.
    −  The country was facing a Western BOYCOTT of its trade because of the
capture of the US embassy.
    −  The Iranian armed forces were demoralised.
Saddam saw an oppor tunity to exploit Iran’s weak position. He planned a
short, limited war which would force Iran to make concessions, but more
importantly would warn Iran that Iraq would not be intimidated or
undermined. He hoped war would not only strengthen his regime but also
would make Iraq the leading pow er in the oil-rich Gulf.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain:
•  one way in which oil was an important cause of the war
•  one other factor which caused the war.
FOCUS TASK 7.4
Why did Iraq invade Iran in 1980?
The text gives various reasons for the invasion. Which of them are
examples of:
•  concern for the security of Saddam’s Iraq
•  opportunism
•  a desire to enrich Iraq
•  territorial ambition (to gain more land)?
Some will be examples of more than one of these. Explain which
one you think figured most prominently in Saddam’s mind.
The war reaches stalemate
When Iraqi forces invaded Iran in September 1980, t here was little
resistance and most observers felt that Iraq would soon win. Saddam himself
predicted a ‘whirlwind war’, confident that a swift, heavy blow would
dislodge Khomeini’s Government. He was soon proved wrong.
Within a month Iraqi forces were halted in the Iranian desert. They now
resorted to firing missiles at Iran’s cities in order to terrorise the civilian
popu lation. So began the so-called ‘War of the Cities’ in which both sides
bombed and killed hundreds of thousands of civilians.
Iraq had superior firepower but Iran, with its much bigger popu lation, sent in
hundreds of thousands of new recruits, in ‘human waves’, many of them fired
up with revolutionary enthusiasm, willing to become MARTYRS – to sacrifice
their lives for the Islamic revolution. A message left by one young Iranian
soldier for his parents was typical: ‘Don’t cry mother, because I am happy. I
am not dead. Dear father, don ’t cry because you will be proud when you
realise I am a martyr.’ Most Iranians believed they were fighting for good
against evil.
SOURCE 9
The Iranian front lines tend to be scenes of chaos and dedication,
with turbaned mullahs, rifles slung on their backs, rushing about on
brightly coloured motorcycles encouraging the troops. Religious
slogans are posted everywhere, and sometimes reinforcements
arrive cheerfully carrying their own coffins as a sign of willingness
to be ‘martyred’.
A description by a reporter of what he
observed on the Iranian battle front.
SOURCE 10
My involvement in the war was a reflection of the nature of our
Islamic revolution. It was based on a new interpretation of religion –
getting involved in the war was a sacred duty. We were led by a
prophet-like statesman Khomeini so this is how we perceived the
war. This was the reason for our overwhelming commitment. The
war could not be separated from our religion.
An Iranian man tells the British journalist,
Robert Fisk, what had motivated him when he
went to the war front in 1984.
SOURCE 11
Members of the Iranian Basiji (mobilized
volunteer forces) pray behind a cleric, their
weapons stacked to one side, during military
training in Tehran, Iran, during the Iran–Iraq
War, 6 November 1981.
Source Analysis
How far do Sources 9, 10 and 11 agree about the importance of
religion in this war?
Within two years, Iran had recaptured all of its land and had cut off Iraq from
its only sea ports. There were calls for a ceasefire but these came to nothing
because Iran said it would not settle for anything less than the overthrow of
Saddam’s regime.
When Iran stated that its target was to seize Baghdad, the Iraqi capital, the
Iraqi forces became more united in their determination to defend their
country. By 1984, t he two sides were bogged dow n in trench warfare along
the 1000- mile border. It was similar, in this way, to the fighting in the
trenches on the western front in the First World War except that sand, not
mud, was what bogged the soldiers dow n.
Foreign involvement
Most of the Arab states supported Iraq. In particular, the Sunni rulers of the
Gulf states (see Figure 1) had little support for Iran’s Islamic revolution.
They were oppos ed to the spread of Iran’s revolutionary, Shiite version of an
Islamic state. They feared that if it won the war Iran might liberate the Iraqi
Shiites and establish an Iraqi state loyal to Khomeini. They feared Iran
would stir up the Shiite minorities in their own countries. They also believed
Iran posed a threat to their oil fields. So:
•  Saudi Arabia and the smaller oil-rich Gulf states, together with Egypt and
Jordan, supplied money and arms to Iraq
•  Jordan also provided a route for Iraq’s imports and exports through the
port of Aqaba (see Figure 1). This was vital for Iraq when its access to the
Gulf was cut off by Iranian forces.
Syria, however, supported Iran because of intense rivalry with its neighbour,
Iraq. The Syrians shut the Iraqi pipelines which passed through its territory to
the Mediterranean. In return, Syria received free Iranian oil.
France, Germany and the Soviet Union also sided with Iraq, as did the USA.
They were all bitterly oppos ed to the new regime in Iran. France became the
main non-Arab supplier of arms to Iraq. America’s support became more
active when the Iranians counter-attacked and talked of advancing on
Baghdad. The thought of the revolutionary Iranians controlling so much of the
oil in the Gulf terrified the Americans as well as most of the Arab states.
Khomeini might then be able to control world oil prices! Furthermore, an
Iranian victory might lead to the collapse of pro-Western regimes in the Gulf.
Using their satellite technology, the Americans kept Iraq informed of Iranian
troop m ovements. They also provided Iraq with equipment which was later
used to make chemical weapons and, like the Arab states, they turned a blind
eye when these were used against the Iranians.
From 1986 t he fighting was focused on the Gulf, the vital route through which
both Iraq and Iran exported their oil. Each side attacked the enemy’s oil
installations and tankers. The Iraqi air force controlled the skies but the
Iranian navy was stronger. When the Iranians began to attack Kuwaiti ships in
retaliation for Kuwait’s support for Iraq, the Soviet Union offered to help the
Kuwaitis. The USA swiftly stepped in to provide protection for Kuwaiti
ships, both to pre-empt further Soviet aid and to maintain its influence with
the oil-rich Gulf states. When the Iranians cut off Iraq’s access to the Gulf
through the Shatt al-Arab waterway (see Figure 12), the USA provided
protection for Iraqi shipping and destroyed much of the Iranian navy.
FIGURE 12
This map shows some of the main areas of
fighting in the Iran–Iraq War.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can:
•  describe how one other state became involved in the war
•  explain one reason why other states became involved in the war.
Ceasefire, 1988
In July 1988, t he Iranians finally accepted a ceasefire. Their economy was in
ruins, the stream of ‘martyrs’ had subsided and they faced the prospect of a
direct war with the USA. There was no peace treaty, only a truce, and bot h
sides continued to rearm.
It had been one of the longest and most destructive wars since the Second
World War. No one knows the exact casualties but it is estimated that nearly a
million Iranians and half a million Iraqis had died.
Think!
Saddam Hussein expected a ‘whirlwind war’ in which Iraq would
achieve a quick victory. Instead he got an eight-year war that
ended in stalemate. Why did this happen?
1  Use the text to create a mind map of reasons for the long war. It
should have the following branches:
    •  actions by Iraq
    •  actions by Iran
    •  actions by outsiders.
2  Circle any reasons that you think are particularly important then
write a paragraph to explain why they are so important.
Consequences for Iran
Khomeini said that he found agreeing to a ceasefire ‘more deadly than
poison’. Twelve million people filled the streets of Tehran for his funeral,
lining the streets leading to the cemetery. The Islamic Republic continued to
attract wide support in Iran.
Although Iran suffered widespread destruction and huge loss of life, it had a
popu lation of 55 m illion and was still a major pow er. However, it had not
succeeded in exporting its revolutionary, Shiite brand of Islam.
Consequences for Iraq
Iraq’s economy and society had also suffered extensive damage. As well as
the human casualties the health and education of the entire popu lation
suffered. During the war, more and more was spent on weapons. Life
expectancy fell and infant mortality increased.
When the war ended, the Iraqi Government promised its people peace and
prosperity. What they got instead was further hardship and more terror. Iraq
faced debts of $80 bi llion yet instead of rebuilding the country, Saddam kept
a million men in arms and pou red money into developing the most advanced
weapons. The economy was in tatters and there was no pos t-war recovery.
Despite the terror exercised by Saddam’s police and army, there were riots
and strikes. Some oppos ition was co-ordinated in the mosques, which were
beyond the control of Saddam’s police and army. The army would not dare to
attack the mosques, the most holy places, because it would intensify the
oppos ition of all Muslims. But the main threat to Saddam came from his
army. Many officers felt cheated of victory over Iran and some privately
blamed Saddam for the failure to defeat their neighbour. There were several
attempts to ove rthrow him between 1988 a nd 1990 a nd many officers were
executed for conspiracy. Saddam needed to divert attention away from a
growing military crisis in Baghdad. This may have been one of the reasons
for the invasion of Kuwait.
Revision Tip
Saddam Hussein invaded Iran in 1980 to extend his power but eight
years of war led to a stalemate. Make sure you can explain:
•  two ways in which the war damaged Iraq
•  one way in which the war either strengthened or weakened Iran
•  one way in which the war left the USA with long-term problems.
FOCUS TASK 7.5
What were the consequences of the Iran–Iraq War?
1  From the text above, list the consequences of the war for Iran,
for Iraq and for the West.
2  ‘A war with no winners!’ How far do you agree with this
description of the Iran–Iraq War? Use your list to support your
judgement.
Why did Saddam invade Kuwait in
1990?
Background to the invasion
Kuwait is a small and oil-rich state on the southern border of Iraq. Both had
been run by Britain after the First World War but Britain did not leave
Kuwait until 1961. When the British left, Iraq had laid claim to Kuwait but
other Arab states had sent troops  to keep the Iraqis out and Iraq reluctantly
recognised Kuwait’s independence in 1963.
FIGURE 13
What was Saddam thinking?
Saddam Hussein’s possible motives for
invading Kuwait.
In 1990 I raq was again threatening Kuwait. The Iran–Iraq War left Saddam
with rising discontent among his own popu lation and even among his military
commanders. He also had $80 bi llion of debt to pay off. The only way he
could do t his was to increase oil production in Iraq. The problem with this
was that Iraq was a member of OPEC (Oil Producing and Exporting
Countries). OPEC controlled oil production in order to keep prices high –
too m uch production meant the price droppe d. Some leading states in OPEC,
particularly Kuwait and Saudi Arabia, refused Saddam’s request. Worse
still, they demanded repayment of funds given to Iraq during the war. Saddam
claimed this was an insult as Iraqi lives had defended Kuwait. He also
accused Kuwait of drilling under Iraq’s borders and taking oil that belonged
to Iraq.
Saddam’s invasion of Kuwait, August 1990
Facing increasing discontent at home and a military crisis, Saddam decided
to invade Kuwait. On 2 August 1990, a  huge force of 300,000 c rossed into
Kuwait and ove rran the country. It took just three days and the rest of the
world was taken completely by surprise. However, the international reaction
was almost UNANIMOUS. Nearly all Arab states condemned Saddam’s action
while the UNITED NATIONS Security Council agreed to impose complete
TRADE SANCTIONS against Iraq: no country was to have any trade with Iraq
until their forces had withdrawn from Kuwait. These were the most complete
and effective sanctions ever imposed by the UN.
Saddam’s response to UN sanctions
Saddam, however, was defiant. He declared Kuwait a province of Iraq. He
tried to win Arab support by saying that he would withdraw Iraqi forces only
when the Israelis withdrew t he i r forces from Palestinian lands that had been
occupied since 1967. The Palestinians were thrilled but most Arab states
still condemned Iraq.
News soon emerged of atrocities committed by Iraqi troops  against Kuwaiti
citizens: thousands of Kuwaiti protestors were arrested and hundreds were
gunned dow n, often and deliberately in front of their families. Then came
news that Saddam had ordered the detention of hundreds of foreigners as
hostages, most of whom were Westerners caught in Iraq or Kuwait. This
caused outrage. Some of the hostages were used as human shields by being
kept near to military targets. Although the women and children, the sick and
the old were soon released, there was still widespread condemnation of
Iraqi behaviour.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember:
•  one long-term reason and
•  one short-term reason why Saddam invaded Kuwait in August
1990.
ACTIVITY
How do you think the invasion would be reported in a newspaper in
your own country? Write a headline and a brief article explaining
why Saddam Hussein ordered his forces to invade Kuwait. Your
word limit is 200 words.
The American reaction
No one was more horrified at the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait than the
Americans. Iraqi forces were now massed on Kuwait’s border with Saudi
Arabia. Many feared that Iraq might also seize the Saudi oil fields, the
biggest in the world, and thus gain control of more than half of the world’s
oil fields.
As long ago as 1957, U S President Eisenhower had written to one of his
advisers: ‘Should a crisis arise threatening to cut the Western world off from
the Mid East oil, we would hav e to use force.’ When the King of Saudi
Arabia requested the USA to send military forces to defend his country in
case of attack, the Americans were quick to obl ige. Over the next few
months, they built up large naval, land and air forces.
SOURCE 14
Our jobs, our way of life, our own freedom and the freedom of
friendly countries around the world would all suffer if control of the
world’s great oil reserves fell into the hands of Saddam Hussein.
US President Bush speaking a fortnight after
the Iraqi invasion of Kuwait.
Multi-national force
Although some Arab states, like Jordan, preferred an ‘Arab’ solution to the
problem, the majority fully supported the deadline which the UN delivered to
Iraq at the end of November: withdraw from Kuwait by 15 J anuary 1991 or
face MILITARY FORCE.
Saddam predicted the ‘mother of all battles’. Over 700,000 t roops  had been
assembled in the deserts of Saudi Arabia. Most were American but Britain
and France also sent large forces. Most significant of all was that many Arab
countries such as Egypt and Syria sent troops , as did other Muslim countries
like Pakistan and Bangladesh. Saudi Arabia itself contributed 100,000
soldiers. In all, 34 c ountries joined the coalition. It was the broadest
coalition ever assembled for a UN operation. Saddam would not be able to
claim that this was a Western crusade against the Arabs and Islam.
Think!
There have been many acts of aggression by one country against
another since the Second World War, but rarely have so many
countries joined together to use military force in order to repel the
aggressor. So why did so many countries agree to join the force
this time?
Make a table listing these different reasons countries had for
joining the MULTI-NATIONAL FORCE.
•  To punish Iraq
•  To protect the world’s oil supplies
•  Fear of what Saddam might do next
•  To uphold international law and the decisions of the UNO
•  To show loyalty to allies (particularly the USA)
Look through the text and sources on pages 166–167 and gather
evidence of these reasons. You could work in pairs or small
groups.
SOURCE 15
A cartoon by Nicholas Garland, in the British
newspaper, the Independent, 10 August
1990, six days after Iraqi forces invaded
Kuwait. The leading figure represents the US
President George Bush, followed in order by
the French president, the British foreign
secretary, the German Chancellor and the
Russian foreign minister.
Source Analysis
1  To what extent do you think the cartoonist in Source 15 approves
of the actions of the United Nations?
2  How useful is it for the historian studying the role of the UN in the
Kuwait crisis?
The Gulf War, January–March 1991
The war to liberate Kuwait became known as the Gulf War (and later ‘The
First Gulf War’). It began with a five-week air assault on military targets but
also on airports, bridges, factories and roads. The coalition forces had
complete air superiority and the most pow erful air force in the world armed
with the most up-to-date weapons. Saddam hoped world opi nion would turn
against the coalition but his hopes came to nothing. He tried to involve Israel
by firing missiles in the hope that this would cause a split between the West
and its Arab allies. The USA persuaded the Israelis not to retaliate and the
Arab members of the US-led coalition stayed firm.
Factfile
Gulf War ceasefire
Peace terms were imposed on Iraq by the UN. These included the
following:
•  Iraq had to recognise Kuwait’s sovereignty.
•  Iraq had to pay REPARATIONS (war damages).
•  Iraqi aircraft could not enter the ‘no-fly zones’ in the Kurdish north
and the south.
•  Iraq had to comply with weapons inspections from the UN to
uncover and destroy all weapons of mass destruction (WMD).
WMD are biological, chemical or nuclear weapons that could be
used to kill as many people as possible.
•  Until all WMD were destroyed the UN imposed wide-ranging
trade sanctions (which virtually cut off Iraq from the rest of the
world).
In February, the ground attack began. The Iraqi forces were no match for the
coalition and were quickly defeated with heavy casualties. US and coalition
troops  were better trained, be tter equipped and more motivated than many of
the reluctant conscripts in the Iraqi army. They were also backed by fearsome
air pow er including helicopter gunships. As they retreated, Iraqi forces tried
to wreck Kuwait by pouring oil into the Gulf and setting fire to the oil fields.
With the Iraqis driven out of Kuwait the US-led forces continued into Iraq
itself. The US President called on the Kurds in the north and the Shiites in the
south to rise up and ove rthrow Saddam. They both responded, bu t they
lacked arms and received no support from US troops . In the Shia south, about
50,000 w ere killed by Saddam’s forces and similar reprisals were expected
in the Kurdish north. With a humanitarian catastrophe looming, media
coverage rallied world opi nion and forced the USA and Britain to act. The
Americans and British established ‘no-fly zones’, which prevented Saddam
regaining control of the north. A ‘safe haven’ was created for the Kurds who
have been effectively in control of their areas ever since.
The coalition forces stoppe d short of Baghdad. There were strong voices in
the US Government that wanted to go further and get rid of Saddam Hussein
altogether. However, their UN mission had been restricted to the liberation of
Kuwait and America’s Arab allies would not have supported an American
overthrow of Saddam. The coalition would have split if the Americans had
attacked Baghdad. Many Arab commentators believed that the USA used the
war to establish its military presence in the Gulf and to dom inate the world’s
oil resources. On 28 F ebruary, a ceasefire was called (see Factfile).
SOURCE 16
A cartoon by Nicholas Garland, from the
British newspaper, the Daily Telegraph, 8
March 1991, a week after the ceasefire.
Source Analysis
1  Explain the message of Source 16.
2  Nicholas Garland created many cartoons commenting on the Gulf
War. Sources 15 and 16 are two examples. You can look up
more of his work at www.cartoons.ac.uk. Here is a brief
summary of his career.
In 1966, Garland became the first political cartoonist for the Daily
Telegraph, a paper that is usually seen as right wing whereas
Garland came from a LEFT-WING background (both of his parents
were communists). In 1986 he became one of the founders of the
Independent newspaper. He had freedom to draw what he liked,
noting in 1988 that political cartoonists derive most of their impact
from their ability to express contrasting views to the rest of the
paper.
Now that you know more about the cartoonist, do these
cartoons tell us more about the cartoonist or the events he
portrays? Explain your view.
Weapons inspections
A month after the ceasefire, the United Nations Special Committee
(UNSCOM) started to search for and destroy Iraq’s weapons of mass
destruction. Because of the serious effect of sanctions Iraq co-operated. The
UN inspectors uncovered a nuclear programme with several kilograms of
highly enriched uranium, necessary for the production of nuclear weapons.
After a year, UNSCOM declared that it had destroyed all medium- and long-
range missiles. Three years later, it said it had destroyed all the material for
making nuclear and chemical weapons. However, it had not been able to
eliminate all of Iraq’s biological weapons programme. Nevertheless, by
1995, t he Iraqi Government was confident that sanctions would soon be
lifted and confessed to the production of some anthrax and nerve gas while
claiming that the stockpiles had been destroyed during the Gulf War.
UNSCOM demanded proof but this was not forthcoming.
The Americans were now increasingly suspicious and distrustful of the Iraqi
Government and they began to demand ‘regime change’ (i.e. the removal of
Saddam) before they would agree to lift sanctions.
SOURCE 17
A Punch cartoon by David Langdon published
in 1991.
Source Analysis
1  What is the message of the cartoon in Source 17?
2  What does it reveal about people’s views on whether Saddam
had WMD?
The impact of sanctions on Iraq
Within a short period of  time the living conditions of the Iraqi people became
increasingly hard:
•  A blockade prevented any imports of machinery, fertilisers, most
medicines and even book s.
•  At first Iraq was not allowed to sell oil. After some months sales were
allowed but they were strictly limited.
•  As Iraq imported much of its food, t his had disastrous consequences. A UN
survey in the mid-1990s  claimed that, in the Baghdad area, a quarter of
those under the age of five were ‘severely malnourished’. By 1997, 7000
children were dying each month of hunger and disease.
•  Iraq was not allowed to import chlorine to purify water in case it was used
in making chemical weapons. The contamination of water led to
widespread outbreaks of dysentery. It is reckoned that between a quarter
and half a million children died during this period.
•  As the humanitarian crisis worsened, the UN came up with a plan in 1996
to allow Iraq to sell its oil in order to buy food. This ‘Oil for Food’
programme was to be run by the UN. It brought much-needed relief to a
desperate people.
Yet sanctions did not increase the oppos ition to Saddam’s regime in Iraq, let
alone lead to rebellion. Saddam used violence and terror, as ever, to control
resources and reward his most loyal supporters.
The roads, bridges and electricity systems in Baghdad and the Sunni areas
were largely rebuilt and, although Iraq’s WMD programme was depleted, the
army was still the biggest in the Arab world. Meanwhile, Saddam allowed
the filming of mass suffering, especially for Arab television networks, so that
the image of Iraq as the victim of the greedy, uncaring West would be
propagated. International opinion began to turn against the policy of
sanctions.
FOCUS TASK 7.6
Why did the multi-national force succeed?
The coalition war against Iraq was successful. Many had expected
a long and costly war. However, with hindsight, we now know that
several factors played a role in coalition success:
•  air power
•  actions of Israel
•  quality of coalition forces
•  rebellion within Iraq
•  not invading Baghdad.
1  Make cards for each factor.
2  Write notes on each card explaining how it contributed.
3  Spread the cards on a large sheet of paper and draw lines to
show how the factors connect to each other.
4  Give each factor a mark out of ten for its importance.
Iraq emerges from isolation
Saddam did not want to give up all his secret weapons and had always tried
to disrupt the UN weapons inspectors. Besides, he knew that the inspection
teams were working closely with the US Central Intelligence Agency (CIA)
and other Western intelligence agencies. He no dou bt suspected that they
were planning to ove rthrow him. When the UN inspection team demanded
access to the headquarters of the Iraqi special security services and to the
presidential palaces, Saddam refused and, in 1997, t he inspectors were
forced to leave Iraq. A year later, in 1998, A merican (and British) planes
started bom bing Iraqi military sites, despite the commonly held view that
Iraq had no more WMD.
Think!
How successful do you think UN sanctions were? Consider:
•  Did they eliminate WMD?
•  How did they affect the lives of Iraqis?
•  How did they affect the USA’s image in the Arab world?
Give the sanctions a score out of ten and write a paragraph to
explain your score.
Most Arab states had been happy to see Iraq taught a lesson in 1991 bu t now
the bom bing campaign turned many of them against the USA. When the US
Secretary of State, Madeleine Albright, was asked on television if the
starvation of half a million people was justified, she said it had been ‘worth
it’. This caused widespread anger in the Arab world and several states
started to trade with Iraq again. Iraq was re-emerging from international
isolation.
Even the USA seemed to accept the revival of Iraq’s oil industry. A growing
global economy was pushing up oil prices and several American firms won
contracts to rebuild Iraq’s oil wells. By 1999 t he UN had approved unlimited
oil exports from Iraq and Saddam’s regime had restored DIPLOMATIC
RELATIONS with all its neighbours. It had got rid of the hated UN inspectors
and still had the most feared army in the Arab world. Saddam had challenged
both the UN and the USA (now the world’s one and only superpower), and
he had survived. When George W Bush, the son of the previous president,
was elected president of the USA in 2000, t here was renewed talk in
Washington of the need to ‘remove Saddam’.
FOCUS TASK 7.7
To what extent was Saddam Hussein responsible for conflict
in the Gulf region, 1970–2000?
The two most obvious examples of conflict in the Gulf in this period
are, of course, the Iran–Iraq War and the Gulf War of 1990–91, but
you should also make some reference to conflict within states.
Some examples are listed in the table below.
1  Copy out and complete this table using what you have found out
from your study of this chapter. Some cells have been started
for you.
Conflict Saddam
Hussein
responsible?Other states, UN or Western
powers responsible?
1970s: conflict
and revolution
in Iran  
1980: invasion
of IranSaddam
ordered the
invasion,
confident of a
quick victory. 
1980s: the
Iran–Iraq War Iran said it would not agree to a
ceasefire until Saddam’s
Government was overthrown.
1980s (and
especially in
1988): conflict
with Kurds and
Shiites  
1990: invasion
of Kuwait Saddam accused the Kuwaitis
of producing too much oil so
that the price would go down
and the Iraqi economy be
weakened.
1990–91 and
subsequent
war  
1990s:
Saddam
Hussein and
UN sanctions After the UN inspectors were
forced to leave Iraq in 1997, US
and British planes bombed Iraqi
military sites.
2  Look back to your prediction on page 152. Do you now think that
you got these factors in the right order?
3  Now write an essay in answer to this question: To what extent
was Saddam Hussein responsible for conflict in the Gulf region,
1970–2000? In your conclusion you should make a judgement
about the extent of Saddam Hussein’s role. Do you think he was
wholly responsible? Mostly responsible? No more responsible
than others? Use the table above to support your answer.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Arab nationalism
•  Ayatollah
•  Baath Party
•  Chemical weapons
•  Coup
•  Martyr
•  Mullah
•  Multi-national force
•  Nationalism
•  Sanctions
•  Shia (Shiite)
•  Sunni
•  Superpowers
•  WMD (Weapons of Mass Destruction)
Chapter Summary
Why did events in the Gulf matter, c.1970–2000?
Iraq
  1  Iraq was ruled by a pro-British monarchy until 1958. Saddam
Hussein came to power after the Baath Party took control in
1968. Saddam nationalised the oil industry and built up Iraq’s
economy.
  2  He held on to power by the use of terror, PROPAGANDA and a
Sunni-dominated government, and he crushed Kurdish and Shiite
opposition.
Iran
  3  Iran was ruled by the Shah although the British controlled the oil
fields. Prime Minister Mossadeq nationalised the oil industry in
1951 but was overthrown under Anglo–US pressure two years
later.
  4  Growing opposition led to the downfall of the pro-Western Shah
and the establishment of an Islamic republic led by Ayatollah
Khomeini in 1979.
Iran–Iraq War, 1980–88
  5  Saddam took advantage of Iran’s post-revolutionary weakness
and invaded his neighbour in 1980. Iraq scored early victories but
the Iranians sent in human waves, many of them willing to be
martyrs. The ‘War of the Cities’ led to widespread destruction
and a huge death toll.
  6  Foreign intervention also intensified the fighting. The Sunni-
dominated Arab Gulf states feared a victory for Shiite
revolutionary Iran and supported Iraq, as did the Soviet Union
and Western powers. In the oil tanker war that developed after
1986, the US actively supported Iraq.
The Gulf War, 1990–91
  7  Iraqi forces invaded Kuwait to gain control of its oil fields and the
UN imposed trade sanctions on Iraq.
  8  To liberate Kuwait and also prevent a possible Iraqi attack on
Saudi oil fields, the US led a huge multi-national force against
Iraq. This was supported by most of the Arab states.
  9  The Iraqis were driven out of Kuwait and forced to agree to
harsh peace terms. UN sanctions were imposed to force Iraq to
destroy all its Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD).
10  Most WMD were destroyed while sanctions hurt the Iraqi
population, but Saddam remained in power.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
1  (a)  Describe the methods used by Saddam Hussein to
consolidate his power in Iraq. [4]
    (b)  Why did Iraq and Iran go to war in 1980? [6]
    (c)  ‘Saddam Hussein brought nothing but misery to the Iraqi
people.’ Explain how far you agree with this statement. [10]
2  Study Source 7 on page 160. Why did the revolutionary
Government of Iran publish this photograph in 1979? [7]
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
Exam Focus: Core Content
questions – Paper 1
The Core Content you have studied in Section A will be examined in
both Paper 1 and Paper 2. The main difference between the two
papers is that Paper 2 is a source-based paper while Paper 1 is
made up of structured essay questions.
Structure
Section A of Paper 1 examines the Core Content and consists of structured
essay questions.
Structured essay questions usually have a similar structure and require you to
describe, explain and reach a supported judgement.
Description means giving an account from your own knowledge.
Explanation means using your own knowledge to explain why or how
something happened.
A supported judgement means your own opinion about something based on
relevant contextual knowledge. It is important to be balanced – i.e. to
examine different points of view before reaching a judgement.
The tasks in this book  will have developed the skills and knowledge for you
to do a ll these things.
Section A questions usually have a similar structure:
•  You are given a source or a simple statement – however, you are not
asked questions on this; it is simply intended to focus your thinking.
Then there are three sub-questions testing different skills:
a)  A knowledge or description question. This will often begin ‘describe’ or
‘what’.
b)  An explanation question. This will often begin with ‘explain’ or ‘why’.
c)  A judgement question. One common type of question gives you a
statement to agree or disagree with. You need to make a judgement and
back up your judgement with evidence and argument.
For example:
a)  Describe how the Treaty of Versailles punished Germany.
[4]
b)  Explain what Wilson wanted to achieve from the peace
settlement at Versailles.
[6]
c)  ‘Clemenceau did not get what he wanted out of the Paris Peace
Conference.’ How far do you agree with this statement? Explain
your answer.
[10]
Think before you write
It is a common mistake for students to launch straight into writing as soon as
they see the question, but our advice is that you spend some time thinking
before you do s o.
1 Choose your question carefully
Read al l questions carefully before you decide which to answer. You should
have revised enough to give you a choice of questions, but don’t immediately
opt for your favourite topic. Sometimes your less favoured topic might have a
question which is easier to answer or which suits you better.
2 Read the questions carefully
This might sound obvi ous but there is a skill to it.
•  Look for command words such as ‘describe’ or ‘explain’ which let you
know what type of skills you have to use.
•  Identify the topic and the sub-topic. Questions will often focus on an
event, individual or historical issue.
•  Look for dates. If dates are given they will be important.
3 Plan your answer
If you think through your answer first, then writing it is easy. If you skip the
thinking and just start writing, the risks are:
•  Your writing will be muddled.
•  You will write in an illogical order.
•  Your points won’t lead to your conclusion.
•  Even more likely, you will keep thinking of something more to say and will
run out of time.
4 Plan your time
Running out of time is not unlucky, it is a mistake! The marks for each sub-
question guide you as to how long to spend.
Worked examples: 1919–39
These first examples are based on the content of Chapters 1 to 3.
None of the answers on pages 173–175 is a real student
answer. We have written them to help show the features.
How to approach description-style questions
Description questions may not use the word ‘describe’ but that is what you
need to do. For example:
What were Germany’s main territorial losses under the Treaty of
Versailles?
[4]
This will be straightforward if you have revised thoroughly. You simply have
to display accurate knowledge. However, bear in mind you still have to:
•  Select facts which are relevant to the question. Selection is a vital skill for
a historian. Questions like this have a strict content focus. Don’t waste
time giving information that is not relevant.
•  Write a paragraph rather than just a list of points.
A common error is to write too m uch.
Under the Treaty of Versailles Germany lost 10 per cent of its
land, so many Germans ended up living in other countries. Some
German land was given to its European neighbours. Alsace-
Lorraine was given to France and West Prussia was given to
Poland to ensure that Poland had a sea port. Germany also lost all
its overseas colonies including Togoland and Cameroon and
German East Africa which were given to Britain and France.
Here is an example we have written of a good answer. It uses
plenty of relevant knowledge to thoroughly describe the
main territorial losses under the Treaty of Versailles.
How to approach explanation-style questions
Here is an example of an explanation question.
Explain why Clemenceau and Lloyd George disagreed at the
Paris Peace Conference about how to treat Germany.
[6]
Read the question carefully to see what you have to explain. The focus is
on:
•  Clemenceau and Lloyd George (not on Wilson)
•  how to treat Germany.
You need to select, from your knowledge of the Peace Conference, examples
of how and w hy these two people (Clemenceau and Lloyd George) disagreed
about this specific thing (how to treat Germany). You probably know a lot
more about the Peace Conference than this but once again it is vital to remain
focused and not give unnecessary information.
Use a paragraph structure to help you fully develop your answer. Many
teachers use Point, Evidence, Explain (PEE) to help students. You might have
another technique.
A common error which students make is to describe the disagreements
rather than giving reasons for them.
Lloyd George and Clemenceau disagreed over what to do about
Germany because Clemenceau saw Germany as a bigger threat
than Lloyd George did. During the war France suffered massive
damage to its industries, towns and agriculture. Over two-thirds of
French troops were killed or injured in the war. Germany’s
population was still much greater than France’s (75 million
compared to 40 million) and Germany had invaded France in 1870
and 1914. Lloyd George did not see Germany as a threat in the
same way. In fact he wanted to rebuild Germany so that British
industries could start trading with Germany.
This answer gets straight to the point and gives valid
reasons about why the leaders disagreed about how to treat
Germany. There is no wasting time on irrelevant or
background information.
Lloyd George and Clemenceau also disagreed about what
measures would work. Clemenceau thought the best way to get
future peace was to cripple Germany by breaking it up into
separate states, reducing its army and forcing it to pay huge fines.
Lloyd George believed this would not work. It would simply make
Germany want revenge in the future. So although he favoured
fines and some limits on German arms he did not think Germany
should be treated as harshly as Clemenceau did.
The opening sentence of each paragraph clearly states a
reason for disagreement. The rest of each paragraph
explains clearly why Clemenceau held this view and why
Lloyd George held a different view.
How to approach judgement-style questions
An important skill for the O Level and IGCSE History course is to be able to
think like a historian and make a judgement. Can you:
•  weigh up different factors – whether you think one factor is more important
than others
•  decide how far you agree or disagree with a particular opinion?
Here is an example of a judgement question.
‘The Treaty of Versailles was a fair settlement.’ How far do you
agree with this statement? Explain your answer.
[10]
You need to plan your answer to this question before you start writing so that
you remain focused on the topic throughout your answer. So make sure you:
•  Step 1: understand the statement.
•  Step 2: list key points which support or oppos e the statement.
•  Step 3: decide on your argument (the view that you are best able to support
with evidence).
You are then ready to write your answer.
There are many different ways to structure your answer. Many teachers
advise students to:
•  explain reasons to agree with the statement
•  explain reasons to disagree
•  finally, to express your judgement as to how far you agree.
There is not a right or wrong judgement to reach as long as you can explain
yourself and support it with valid knowledge. Make sure you can write
balanced answers that use your wider knowledge of the topic, as it is rare in
History that there is ever a single cause for any event.
A common error is to only give your own view without considering another
or giving it little or no explanation.
There are many arguments to support the view that the Treaty of
Versailles was a fair settlement. To begin with, it was strongly
believed that Germany had started the war and was therefore
responsible for it. It was certainly true that Germany invaded
neutral Belgium in 1914, which broke international treaties.
Another argument was that most of the fighting on the western
front took place in Belgium and France. France lost around 1.6
million troops and civilians as well as suffering huge damage to
industry, towns and agriculture. There was no fighting on German
soil and so there was a strong case that Germany should pay
compensation.
The first three paragraphs give reasons why historians or
people at the time would argue the Treaty was fair. These
could be all put in a single paragraph but it can help
organise your thinking to put a point per paragraph.
A third argument was that the Treaty was not as harsh as its critics
claimed. Germany certainly lost territory in the Versailles
settlement – 10 per cent of its land, all colonies, 12.5 per cent of
its population. However, it could have been a lot harsher.
Clemenceau wanted Germany to be broken up into small states.
And when we look at the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, which Germany
forced Russia to sign in 1918, we can see that Germany was
much harsher in its terms with Russia than the Allies were with
Germany at Versailles.
Of course, there were terms that were seen as unfair. Germans
regarded the Treaty as a diktat because they were not consulted
about it. They also believed that the Allies operated double
standards. For example, the German army was limited to 100,000
men but France and Britain and most other countries did not
reduce their armed forces to the same levels. Another term that
could be seen as unfair was the fact that many Germans were left
outside Germany as a result of the Treaty.
This paragraph gives reasons why historians or people at
the time might argue the Treaty was unfair.
Overall, I agree with the statement. Obviously no treaty will be
seen as fair by all sides but the Treaty of Versailles was as fair as
it possibly could have been, and was a lot fairer on Germany than
it might have been. The arguments against the Treaty were mainly
complaints from the German point of view at the time. But most
historians, such as Margaret Macmillan, with the benefit of
hindsight, believe that the Treaty could have been a lot harsher. I
put more faith in the historians and therefore this convinces me
that the Treaty was not unfair.
The conclusion states a clear judgement, supported with
evidence.
Practice
a)  Describe how the Treaty of Versailles punished Germany.
[4]
b)  Explain what Wilson wanted to achieve from the peace
settlement at Versailles.
[6]
c)  ‘Clemenceau did not get what he wanted out of the Paris Peace
Conference.’ How far do you agree with this statement? Explain
your answer.
[10]
Worked examples: 1945–2000
These examples are based on the content of Chapters 4–7.
None of the answers on pages 176–178 is a real student
answer. We have written them to help show the features.
How to approach description-style questions
Description questions may not use the word ‘describe’ but that is what you
need to do. For example:
Describe Saddam Hussein’s rise to power in Iraq.
[4]
This will be straightforward if you have revised thoroughly. You simply have
to display accurate knowledge. However bear in mind you still have to:
•  Select facts which are relevant to the question. Selection is a vital skill for
a historian. Questions like this have a strict content focus so don ’t waste
time giving information that is not relevant.
•  Write a paragraph rather than just a list of points.
A common error is writing too m uch for a four-mark question – this will
waste time.
Saddam Hussein rose to power as a result of his position in the
Baath Party. In 1972 the Iraqi Government nationalised Iraq’s oil
industry, taking control back from the British. This was a daring
and popular move. Saddam was in charge of the nationalisation
and this made him popular. Saddam then went on to use the oil
money to build up services like health and education for the Iraqi
people, which made him more powerful still.
Here is an example we have written of a good answer. It uses
plenty of relevant knowledge to thoroughly describe Saddam
Hussein’s rise to power.
How to approach explanation-style questions
Here is an example of an explanation question.
Why was the Truman Doctrine important?
[6]
Read the question carefully to see what you have to explain.
The focus for this question is on:
•  the Truman Doctrine
•  why it was important.
You need to select, from your knowledge of the Truman Doctrine, examples
of how and w hy it was important. It is vital to remain focused and not give
unnecessary information.
Use a paragraph structure to help you fully develop your answer. Many
teachers use Point, Evidence, Explain (PEE) to help students. You might have
another technique.
A common error is to describe the policy rather than giving reasons why it
was important.
The Truman Doctrine was important because it marked an
increase in tension between the USA and USSR and could even
be seen as the start of the Cold War. The US President Harry
Truman was angry and concerned at the way that Stalin had
established communist regimes in many eastern European states
in the period 1946–47. Although the Soviet leader Stalin saw this
as a defensive policy against possible future invasions, Truman
regarded it as Stalin trying to build an empire. His response was
the Truman Doctrine, designed to stop any further spread of
communism.
This is a good clear opening.
This is quite an interesting point but it is not really
answering the question.
Under the Truman Doctrine the USA said it would send money,
equipment and advice to any country which was, in American
eyes, threatened by a communist take-over. He did not offer
troops. Most of the communist take-overs had been carried out
by communist sympathisers inside each country who had been
helped by Stalin. Truman therefore chose to help opponents of
communism in a similar sort of way. This way he could oppose
the spread of communism without triggering a war.
This section explains what Truman’s concerns were and
why he responded to those concerns with the Truman
Doctrine.
How to approach judgement-style questions
An important skill for the O-Level and IGCSE History course is to be able to
think like a historian and make a judgement. Can you:
•  weigh up different factors – whether you think one factor is more important
than others
•  decide how far you agree or disagree with a particular opinion?
Here is an example of a judgement question.
‘The USA was more responsible than the USSR in causing the Cold
War in the late 1940s.’ How far do you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer.
[10]
You need to plan your answer before you start writing so you remain focused
on the topic in the question. Make sure you:
•  Step 1: understand the statement.
•  Step 2: list key points which support or oppos e the statement.
•  Step 3: decide on your argument (the view that you are best able to support
with evidence).
You are then ready to write your answer.
There are many different ways to structure your answer. Many teachers
advise students to
•  explain reasons to agree with the statement
•  explain reasons to disagree
•  finally to express your judgement as to how far you agree.
There is not a right or wrong judgement to reach as long as you can explain
yourself and support your judgement with valid knowledge. Make sure you
can write balanced answers that use your wider knowledge of the topic as it
is rare in History that there is ever a single cause for any event.
A common error is to only give your own view without considering another
or giving it little or no explanation.
In some respects the statement is correct. The USA could be
accused of causing the Cold War in some ways. One reason for
this was the attitude of US President Truman towards Stalin and
the USSR. His predecessor Roosevelt had had relatively good
relations with Stalin. Truman was much more anti-communist and
aggressive towards the USSR. He was very critical of Stalin’s
actions in eastern Europe. He tried to intimidate Stalin at the
Potsdam Conference by telling Stalin the USA had developed an
atomic bomb. He also encouraged former British Prime Minister
Winston Churchill to give the ‘iron curtain’ speech in 1947, which
was a major cause of tension.
Good start – very clear what is being said here.
Again, very clear what point is being made – and this is then
followed up with supporting facts.
There were other ways in which the USA could be seen as
responsible for the Cold War. One of these was the USA’s
Marshall Aid programme. This programme channelled billions of
dollars of economic aid into the countries which had been affected
by the war, mostly countries in western Europe. However, it was
only available to countries that agreed to have democratic
governments like the USA and capitalist economies, like the USA.
The Soviets saw this as ‘dollar imperialism’ – trying to create an
empire of states which were dependent on US dollars.
Once again it is very clear what point is being made and it is
followed up well with supporting evidence.
On the other hand it could be argued that the USSR was more
responsible for the Cold War. At the end of the Second World War
Soviet troops drove German forces out of eastern Europe.
However, after Germany surrendered in 1945 the Soviet forces
stayed in most eastern European states. At the same time Stalin
encouraged and supported communist supporters within states like
Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia to take control of these
countries and set up communist governments which supported the
USSR. This caused a great deal of tension with the USA and
Britain who saw this as the USSR building an empire and planning
to take over the rest of Europe as well.
This is still a strong balancing point although it is not quite
as crystal clear as the two paragraphs before. The reader
has to wait to find out what point is being made.
Overall, I believe that the statement is incorrect and that neither
the USA nor USSR were more to blame for the Cold War. The real
difficulty was that each side was unable to understand the
viewpoint of the other side because of their differing ideologies. As
a result they tended to misunderstand and misinterpret each
other’s actions and this is what caused the worst of the tension.
This is a sensible conclusion. If you really wanted to go the
extra mile you could possibly refer to the work of a historian
you have read to fully develop a paragraph like this.
Practice
a)  Describe the Bay of Pigs incident of 1961.
[4]
b)  Explain the reasons why Khrushchev put nuclear missiles on
Cuba in 1962.
[6]
c)  ‘The Cuban Missile Crisis was a victory for the USA.’ How far
do you agree with this statement? Explain your answer.
[10]
Exam Focus: Core Content
questions – Paper 2
Paper 2 will also be based on your study of the Core Content in
Chapters 1 to 7. The difference between Paper 1 and Paper 2 is
that Paper 2 is a source-based investigation. It tests your ability to
use your knowledge and skill to evaluate a range of sources and
use them to answer an historical question. This question will be
drawn from the Core Content. You will have been told in advance
what general area this investigation will be based on. For example:
‘How effectively did the USA contain the spread of communism?’
Features
•  The paper will include a range of sources. There will be some pictures
and a range of different types of written sources.
•  There will be no ‘trick’ sources designed to catch you out, but usually
some sources will agree with each other, some will disagree and some
will do a  bit of both!
•  There will be six questions. There will be no choice of questions – you
have to answer them all.
•  These questions take you step-by-step through the sources: using,
evaluating and comparing them towards a final question that gets you using
all the sources to answer the big question.
•  The skill you need to answer source-based questions is to think like a
historian. This means doing more than extracting basic information from a
source. It means considering the following:
    –  Purpose: why the source was produced.
    –  Audience: the audience for the source.
    –  Methods: the methods used in the source to convince its audience.
    –  Attitudes: what the source reveals about the person/people who made
it, for example their attitudes, values, concerns. The makers may be
angry, afraid, unhappy, outraged … a nd much more.
    –  Tone: sources may deny, criticise, mock, praise, accuse, threaten or
warn, and this will allow you to make inferences about the author of
the source.
•  As well as the content of the sources, you will also need to use your
background knowledge to evaluate the sources (e.g. your knowledge of
events might confirm what is being said in a source, or your knowledge of
a particular group might help you to evaluate a source produced by that
group).
Advice
•  Read through all the sources before you start writing anything.
•  Read through all the questions as well. Note the marks for each so you
know how much time to spend.
•  Always support your answers with details from the sources. For written
sources use actual words or phrases from the source to support your
answer. For visual sources describe relevant features from the source and
explain how they support your answer.
•  Use your background knowledge whenever it’s helpful, but don’t include
background knowledge just for its own sake if it’s got nothing to do w ith
the source or the question.
•  When you use your own knowledge avoid saying ‘my knowledge tells
me…’. Just state what you know.
•  Avoid speculation – so avoid using words like ‘might’ and ‘could’ (such
as ‘The author might be a supporter so he could be biased…’).
•  Avoid phrases such as ‘we don’t know what else…’ or ‘she could have
forgotten…’. This type of phrase could apply to any source so doe s not
display any skill or knowledge.
•  Sources might support or challenge each other. When you explain how
Source X supports or challenges Source Y, be specific – use details from
the sources to support your explanation.
•  Don’t include your own personal views which are not historical (such
as, ‘I think it was awful the way the USA used chemical weapons in
Vietnam…’).
Question types
•  This page gives examples of question types. You could encounter any type
of question about any type of source so this is not comprehensive! These
are only a small selection of possible question types.
•  It is also important to remember that your answers to the different types of
question will vary depending on the actual source – there is no ‘one size
fits all’ formula.
•  On pages 182–183 and 186–187 are some worked examples with our
comments. On pages 184–185 and 188–189 are sets of exam-style
questions we have put together.
‘What is the message?’
The source could be a cartoon, or a poster or part of a speech –
something where the creator is trying to make a particular point.
Think about the following:
•  What is the cartoonist/speaker/artist for or against? These
sources are not made simply to inform. They might criticise,
disapprove or maybe mock.
•  How do you know? What details in the source tell you the maker’s
view?
•  Why then? Why was the message relevant at that point in time?
•  Note: For message questions, you do not need to comment on
reliability.
Comparison: ‘How far do Sources X and Y agree about…?’
Look for:
•  similarities and/or differences in the content of the sources
•  similarities and/or differences at a more subtle level, for example
in the attitudes shown, or the purpose. For example, two text
sources may agree about events or details (e.g. that the USSR
did place missiles in Cuba) but differ in attitude (e.g. one might be
critical of the USSR whereas the other is supportive).
‘How useful is Source X for…?’
All sources are useful for something so think in terms of ‘How is this
source useful…?’ Even a biased source is useful for telling you
about the attitudes of the person or organisation who created them.
For example, an American poster accusing communists of crimes is
not reliable evidence about communists but it is very useful in
showing how far Americans were worried about communism.
Purpose: ‘Why was Source X published at this time?’
Work out the message of the source and then think about why this
message was relevant at the time or what the maker of the source
wanted to achieve by getting that message across.
For example did they want to change people’s attitudes or behaviour
(e.g. getting them to join a movement or contribute funds to a
particular cause).
‘Are you surprised by Source X?’
These questions test your knowledge and understanding of the
period in which the source was created.
Look for whether the events and attitudes in the source are
surprising given what you know about the context of the time.
For example, you might be surprised to hear a speech by President
Richard Nixon building friendly relations with communist China in the
1970s although the USA was traditionally very anticommunist. Or
you might not be surprised because you know he was trying to end
the Vietnam War and this involved improved relations with China.
‘How reliable is Source X about…?’
A source is never reliable or unreliable in itself. It all depends on
what you are using it for.
Think about the following:
•  The author. The caption may tell you something about the author
or you may know something from your contextual knowledge.
Explain whether the author can be trusted to tell the truth about
particular people, issues or events.
•  The tone. If the source uses emotive language or a biased tone
this will affect how far you trust the source’s view of particular
people, issues or events.
•  Knowledge. Does the source fit with or contradict your own
knowledge about particular people, issues or events?
•  Cross-referencing. Sometimes you will be asked to compare
sources, but even if you are not you can use other sources in the
paper to support or contradict the source and to comment on their
reliability.
Conclusion: ‘How far do Sources A–G support this statement?’
This is worth most marks. It builds on the previous questions and
asks you to use as many sources as possible in your answer.
Make sure you:
•  Address both sides of the argument: how the sources support and
how they don’t support the statement.
•  Work through source by source, explaining whether and how they
support or challenge the statement.
•  Start a new paragraph for each source.
•  When you make use of a source in your answer, don’t just refer to
it by letter. Use relevant detail from the source to show how it
supports or challenges the statement.
•  Comment on the reliability of sources where that affects your
judgement.
Worked examples based on 1919–39
content
We have written the questions for you to practise and
provided some example answers.
1  Study Source A. How useful is this source to an historian?
[8]
SOURCE A
The Sudetenland is the last problem that must be solved and it
will be solved. It is the last territorial claim which I have to make
in Europe.
The aims of our foreign policy are not unlimited … They are
grounded on the determination to save the German people alone
… Ten million Germans found themselves beyond the frontiers
of the Reich … Germans who wished to return to the Reich as
their homeland.
Hitler speaking in Berlin, September 1938.
The source is definitely useful because it tells us how Hitler was
publicly portraying the issue of the Sudetenland to the German
people and the rest of the world. He says that it is the ‘last
territorial claim’ Germany has in Europe. Even though this
turned out not to be true, it is still useful to show us the methods
Hitler used to get what he wanted. He was using the language of
peace because he was trying to take the Sudetenland without
having to fight for it. He worried that Britain and France would
fight alongside Czechoslovakia to stop him and hoped that
promising to leave Czechoslovakia alone would prevent this.
The source also gives us an insight into why some people in
Britain supported Appeasement and helps explain why the
Munich Agreement was generally popular in Britain after it was
signed.
Recognises that biased and untrustworthy sources are
useful! In this case, we may not be able to trust what Hitler
is saying, but it is still useful in revealing how Hitler
manipulated the situation.
2  Study Source B. What is the message of the cartoonist?
[6]
SOURCE B
A British cartoon published in the News of
the World, shortly after the Munich
Agreement.
The message that the cartoonist was trying to put across is that
Chamberlain has done a good job by signing the Munich
Agreement, avoiding a crisis and averting taking the world to
war, and moving it towards peace.
Good idea to start your answer in this way. It gets you
straight to the point. This answer has carefully and
correctly identified that the source is supportive of the
Munich Agreement.
You can see this because he’s shown as tough and strong with
his sleeves rolled up, successfully rolling the globe across the
sheer drop to war below.
The answer has not simply described the cartoon but has
actually used the details to support the point made above.
The cartoonist clearly thinks that giving Hitler the Sudetenland in
1938 was the right decision.
Understands the context in which this cartoon was drawn,
and gets this across, without too much unnecessary
detail.
3  Study Sources C and D. How far does Source D prove Source
C wrong?
[9]
SOURCE C
People of Britain, your children are safe. Your husbands and
your sons will not march to war. Peace is a victory for all
mankind. If we must have a victor, let us choose Chamberlain,
for the Prime Minister’s conquests are mighty and enduring –
millions of happy homes and hearts relieved of their burden.
The Daily Express comments on the
Munich Agreement, 30 September 1938.
SOURCE D
We have suffered a total defeat … I think you will find that in a
period of time Czechoslovakia will be engulfed in the Nazi
regime. We have passed an awful milestone in our history. This
is only the beginning of the reckoning.
Winston Churchill speaking in October
1938. He felt that Britain should resist the
demands of Hitler. However, he was an
isolated figure in the 1930s.
In some ways Source D does prove Source C wrong. The
newspaper says that the Munich Agreement will bring peace –
‘your husbands and sons will not march to war’. This is
contradicted by Churchill when he says ‘This is only the
beginning of the reckoning’. The overall impression given by
Source C is that people are relieved by the Munich Agreement,
whereas Churchill seems to prove this wrong by being very
critical of it.
Uses the content of the sources to show how they
disagree. This is a useful starting point – it is saying that
Source D says Source C is wrong about people’s attitudes
to the Munich Agreement. It is important to explain ‘wrong
about what?’.
However, Source D cannot prove Source C wrong about
people’s reactions to the Munich Agreement. Lots of people in
Britain were relieved that it had averted war, or at least delayed
it in the short term. This can be seen by looking at Source B,
where the cartoonist seems to support Chamberlain’s actions,
showing how he has dealt well with a tricky situation.
Improves the answer because it looks at the issue of
‘proof’ in a different way. By cross-referencing Source C
with another source on the paper, it can be shown that
while Churchill may be right about the Munich Agreement
in general, he cannot prove Source C wrong about
people’s reactions to it.
4  Study Source E. Are you surprised by this source?
[8]
SOURCE E
By repeatedly surrendering to force, Chamberlain has
encouraged aggression … our central contention, therefore, is
that Mr Chamberlain’s policy has throughout been based on a
fatal misunderstanding of the psychology of dictatorship.
Extract from an article in a British
newspaper, the Yorkshire Post, published
in December 1938.
In one sense I am quite surprised by this source. It is very
critical of Chamberlain, saying that Chamberlain has
encouraged aggression and has a fatal misunderstanding of
Hitler. This is surprising because the great majority of
newspapers and politicians and people in 1938 were in favour of
Appeasement and saw him as a hero. Source C shows this kind
of view. On the other hand it is not surprising because it is
published in December 1938 when it was becoming clear that
Hitler might not keep his promise to leave Czechoslovakia
alone. It is also not surprising because there were some critics
of Appeasement, particularly Winston Churchill. Not everyone
supported Chamberlain.
This is a very thorough answer which explains clearly how
the source might be seen as surprising and uses the
content of the source very specifically to back up what is
being said. It also supports the point about it being
surprising with good use of a cross-reference. It then goes
on to show that the source may be seen as unsurprising
by using knowledge of the period, particularly Churchill, to
show that there were some critics of Chamberlain. The
answer could have used a cross-reference to Source D
here as well.
Practice: How successful was the
League of Nations in the 1920s?
This is not a real exam paper. We have written the questions
for you to practise using and evaluating sources.
SOURCE A
The League was created, first and foremost, as a security
organisation. But in this respect it fell badly short of its original
aims. There was no way to guarantee that members would carry
out their obligations to enforce sanctions or undertake military force
where it might be needed. But it was not without its achievements.
For most countries attendance at League meetings in the 1920s
was seen as essential, because the foreign ministers of the major
powers were almost always present. The small and middle sized
states found the League was a vital platform for them to talk about
their interests and concerns. Even those outside the League,
including the United States, found it useful to attend League-
sponsored Conferences and similar events. Without exaggerating
its importance the League developed useful ways of handling inter-
state disputes. For the most part the League handled the ‘small
change’ of international diplomacy. It was not a substitute for great
power diplomacy as Wilson had hoped, but it was an additional
resource which contributed to the handling of international politics.
An American historian writing in 2005.
SOURCE B
Despite its poor historical reputation, the League of Nations should
not be dismissed as a complete failure. Of sixty-six international
disputes it had to deal with (four of which had led to open
hostilities), it successfully resolved thirty-five important disputes
and quite legitimately passed back twenty to the traditional
channels of diplomacy where major powers negotiated settlements
outside the League. It failed to resolve eleven conflicts. Like its
successor the United Nations, it was capable of being effective.
A British historian writing in 2009.
SOURCE C
A cartoon published in the USA in 1919. The
title of the cartoon was ‘The League of
Nations Bridge’ and the character on the right
(John Bull, representing Britain) is saying:
‘Your bridge, Jonathan. We shan’t quarrel
about this.’
SOURCE D
The League Council felt that our role under the League Covenant
was to do everything we could to promote a settlement, and since
the two parties had willingly agreed to accept the decision of the
Conference of Ambassadors our job from this point was to do
everything we could to help the Ambassadors make decisions
which were in line with the opinions expressed in the Assembly in
Geneva. In this I believe we acted rightly and properly.
British Government minister Lord Robert
Cecil writing in October 1923 about the Corfu
crisis. Cecil was the British minister
responsible for League of Nations matters.
SOURCE E
In response to the successive menaces of Mussolini we muzzled
the League, we imposed the fine on Greece without evidence of
her guilt and without reference to the International Court of Justice,
and we disbanded the Commission of Enquiry. A settlement was
thus achieved. At the time I felt that British public opinion will
wonder how it came about that we entered into the dispute upon a
firm moral basis and that in the end we forced Greece to accept a
settlement that was unjust. Corfu was evacuated by the Italians, but
the League of Nations had suffered a defeat from which its prestige
has never recovered.
British Government official Sir Harold
Nicolson writing in 1929, soon after he
resigned from the British diplomatic service
after criticising one of his ministers.
SOURCE F
Greek forces have invaded our sovereign territory. Make only slight
resistance. Protect the refugees. Prevent the spread of panic. Do
not expose the troops to unnecessary losses in view of the fact that
the incident has been laid before the Council of the League of
Nations, which is expected to stop the invasion.
A telegram from the Bulgarian Ministry of
War in Sofia to its army commanders, 22
October 1925.
SOURCE G

A British cartoon about the conflict between
Greece and Bulgaria, published in December
1925.
1  Study Sources A and B.
How far do Sources A and B agree about the League of
Nations? Explain your answer using details from the sources. [8]
2  Study Source C.
Was Source C produced by a supporter or an opponent of
America joining the League? Explain your answer using details
from the source and your own knowledge. [7]
3  Study Sources D and E.
Why do these sources give such different accounts of the
League’s actions over Corfu? Explain your answer using details
from the sources and your own knowledge. [8]
4  Study Source F.
Are you surprised by Source F? Explain your answer using
details from the source and your own knowledge. [8]
5  Study Source G.
What is the message of the cartoonist? Explain your answer
using details from the source and your own knowledge. [7]
6  Study Sources A–G.
‘The League of Nations was very successful in the 1920s.’ How
far do these sources support this statement? Use the sources to
explain your answer. [12]
Worked examples based on 1945–2000
content
1  Study Source A. Why was this published in 1972? [7]
SOURCE A
A photograph of ten-year-old Vietnamese
girl, Phan Thi Kim, after tearing her burning
clothes from her body following a napalm
attack in 1972. This photograph was taken
by an American photographer. It was
published in the New York Times on 8 June
1972 and then republished in many other
newspapers.
The source was published to turn public opinion against the US
involvement in Vietnam.
An excellent start because it is entirely focused on the
question; it identifies a specific outcome of the picture’s
publication.
We can see this because the picture will immediately make the
viewer feel huge sympathy for the young children who have
been burned by napalm.
By 1967 the media had started to ask difficult questions about
American involvement in Vietnam and the media coverage was
no longer generally positive.
The answer correctly places the photograph into its
context.
2  Study Sources B and C. Why do they differ in their accounts
of what happened at My Lai in 1968? [9]
SOURCE B
We were not in My Lai to kill human beings. We were there to kill
ideology that is carried by – I don’t know – pawns. Blobs. Pieces
of flesh. And I wasn’t in My Lai to destroy intelligent men. I was
there to destroy an intangible idea … To destroy Communism.
From Lieutenant Calley’s account of the
event, Body Count, published in 1971.
SOURCE C
This was a time for us to get even. A time for us to settle the
score. A time for revenge – when we can get revenge for our
fallen comrades. The order we were given was to kill and destroy
everything that was in the village. It was to kill the pigs, drop
them in the wells; pollute the water supply … burn the village,
burn the hootches as we went through it. It was clearly explained
that there were to be no prisoners. The order that was given was
to kill everyone in the village. Someone asked if this meant the
women and children. And the order was: everyone in the village,
because those people that were in the village – the women, the
kids, the old men – were VC … or they were sympathetic to the
Viet Cong.
The testimony of US Army Sergeant Hodge
to the official US Army investigation into My
Lai in 1970.
In Source B, Lieutenant Calley gives the impression that the
massacre at My Lai was not really a massacre or a revenge
operation: ‘We were not in My Lai to kill human beings.’ But in
Source C, Sergeant Hodge says it was revenge – the operation
was ‘a time for us to get even’.
Even though this response has not yet tackled the
question of why the sources differ, it is a good approach
because we can see the sources are being compared to
each other, and not dealt with in isolation.
I think the sources say different things because at the time they
were produced, Calley and other officers in Charlie Company
had been charged with murder for what happened at My Lai. So
Hodge is trying to put the blame for what happened on his
senior officers, placing all the responsibility on them, whilst
Calley is trying to justify his actions. He’s trying to appeal to
people’s fear of communism.
This part now successfully tackles the question of why the
sources differ and uses the context and purpose of the
sources to fully explain this.
3  Study Source D. What is the message of the cartoonist? [7]
SOURCE D
An American cartoon from 1967.
The cartoonist is criticising President Lyndon Johnson for lying
to the American people when he says there is enough money to
fight the Vietnam War and help poorer areas of the USA (shown
by the ragged woman labelled US Urban Needs). The cartoonist
clearly thinks that the Vietnam War is getting all the money and
poor Americans are being ignored.
This was published in 1967 and by this time a lot of the US
media were starting to question American involvement.
This answer correctly identifies that this cartoonist is
critical of America’s sustained involvement.
4  Study Source E. How reliable is this source about the Vietnam
War? [8]
SOURCE E
The American military was not defeated in Vietnam –
The American military did not lose a battle of any consequence.
From a military standpoint, it was almost an unprecedented
performance. This included Tet 68, which was a major military
defeat for the VC and NVA.
The United States did not lose the war in Vietnam, the South
Vietnamese did –
The fall of Saigon happened 30 April 1975, two years AFTER the
American military left Vietnam. The last American troops
departed in their entirety 29 March 1973. How could we lose a
war we had already stopped fighting? We fought to an agreed
stalemate.
The Fall of Saigon –
The 140,000 evacuees in April 1975 during the fall of Saigon
consisted almost entirely of civilians and Vietnamese military,
NOT American military running for their lives.
There were almost twice as many casualties in Southeast Asia
(primarily Cambodia) the first two years after the fall of Saigon in
1975 than there were during the ten years the US was involved in
Vietnam.
An extract from a website,
www.slideshare.net, ‘Vietnam War
Statistics’, by an American ex-serviceman.
I don’t think Source E is very reliable at all about the Vietnam
War. I think the source’s whole purpose seems to be to convince
people that America shouldn’t be embarrassed about its actions
in Vietnam and that it could have won the war had it chosen to
stay because the author is very selective in the evidence put
forward, such as the fact that Saigon did not technically fall to
North Vietnam until after the Americans left. He neglects
evidence such as the fact America spent $110 billion on the war
and had been there over ten years without securing victory.
This is a very good response which tackles the question of
reliability in different ways. First, the answer uses
contextual knowledge to challenge details in the source,
and second, the answer examines the purpose of the
source and uses that to question its reliability.
Practice: What caused the Cold War?
This is not a real exam paper. We have written the questions
for you to practise using and evaluating sources.
SOURCE A
A publicity photograph of the Big Three taken
at the Yalta Conference in 1945.
SOURCE B
We (Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin) argued freely and frankly
across the table. But at the end on every point unanimous
agreement was reached … We know, of course, that it was Hitler’s
hope and the German war lords’ hope that we would not agree –
that some slight crack might appear in the solid wall of allied unity
… But Hitler has failed. Never before have the major allies been
more closely united – not only in their war aims but also in their
peace aims.
Extract from President Roosevelt’s report to
the US Congress on the Yalta Conference,
April 1945.
SOURCE C
I have always worked for friendship with Russia but, like you, I feel
deep anxiety because of their misinterpretation of the Yalta
decisions, their attitude towards Poland, their overwhelming
influence in the Balkans excepting Greece, the difficulties they
make about Vienna, the combination of Russian power and the
territories under their control or occupied, coupled with the
Communist technique in so many other countries, and above all
their power to maintain very large Armies in the field for a long
time. What will be the position in a year or two?
Extract from a telegram sent by Prime
Minister Churchill to President Roosevelt in
May 1945.
SOURCE D
OPERATION UNTHINKABLE
REPORT BY THE JOINT PLANNING STAFF
We have examined Operation Unthinkable. As instructed, we have
taken the following assumptions on which to base our examination:
Great Britain and the United States have full assistance from the
Polish armed forces and can count upon the use of German
manpower and what remains of German industrial capacity …
Owing to the special need for secrecy, the normal staffs in Service
Ministries have not been consulted.
OBJECT
The overall or political object is to impose upon Russia the will of
the United States and British Empire. The only way we can achieve
our object with certainty and lasting results is by victory in a total
war.
Extract from a top secret document called
Operation Unthinkable. It was presented by
the Army Chiefs to Churchill in May 1945 but
the research and planning had begun in
February 1945.
SOURCE E
A Soviet cartoon published in 1946.
SOURCE F
A shadow has fallen upon the scenes so lately lighted by the Allied
victory. From Stettin on the Baltic to Trieste on the Adriatic, an iron
curtain has descended. Behind that line lie all the states of central
and eastern Europe. The Communist parties have been raised to
power far beyond their numbers and are seeking everywhere to
obtain totalitarian control. This is certainly not the liberated Europe
we fought to build. Nor is it one which allows permanent peace.
A speech by Winston Churchill on 5 March,
1946. It was given in the USA and was
broadcast widely. At the time Churchill was
no longer British prime minister.
SOURCE G
The following circumstances should not be forgotten. The Germans
made their invasion of the USSR through Finland, Poland and
Romania. The Germans were able to make their invasion through
these countries because, at the time, governments hostile to the
Soviet Union existed in these countries. What can there be
surprising about the fact that the Soviet Union, anxious for its future
safety, is trying to see to it that governments loyal in their attitude to
the Soviet Union should exist in these countries?
A speech by Soviet leader Stalin given on 15
March, 1946. It was broadcast in the USSR
and reported in Britain and the USA.
1  Study Source A.
What can you learn from this source? Explain your answer using
details from the sources. [7]
2  Study Sources B and C.
How far do Sources B and C agree? Explain your answer using
details from the sources. [8]
3  Study Source D.
Are you surprised by Source D? Explain your answer using
details from the source and your own knowledge. [7]
4  Study Source E.
What is the cartoonist’s message? Explain your answer using
details from the sources and your own knowledge. [8]
5  Study Sources F and G.
How far do you think Source F influenced Source G? Explain
your answer using details from the sources and your own
knowledge. [8]
6  Study Sources A–G.
‘The Cold War began because Churchill had such a poor
relationship with Stalin.’ How far do these sources support this
statement? Use the sources to explain your answer. [12]
Advice for O-Level students
O Level is being harmonised with IGCSE History in 2020 so this
advice page is particularly for teachers and students who are used
to the O-Level assessment and reiterates the skills that will be
needed. The content is identical between IGCSE and O Level.
Paper 1
•  Both the O Level and the IGCSE use the same format for Paper 1 and it
will require students to answer questions on their chosen Core Content and
chosen Depth Study options.
•  Questions will require students to use their own knowledge to describe,
explain and make judgements.
•  Students will need to have developed good t ime management skills to
answer each of the different types of question and it is vital that all of the
exam-style questions are practised in lessons.
•  The ability to write extended answers is also important for success.
Students will need to give balanced explanations and use their own
knowledge to reach supported judgements in order to produce the best
answers.
Paper 2
•  Both the O Level and the IGCSE use the same format for Paper 2 and it
will require students to use a range of sources on a prescribed topic from
their chosen Core Content option. The Cambridge International website
tells you the prescribed topic in each examination session.
•  Students will need to be able to interpret, compare, evaluate and make
judgements about the sources using their own knowledge to support their
answers.
•  Time management will, once again, be key to success, so it is important
that students get to work with and annotate different types of sources such
as pictures, written sources, photographs and cartoons and think about why
the author made the source or the significance of the time period it was
made (or both!).
One difference
•  The only difference between the assessment of the two courses is that the
O-Level course DOES NOT include Component 3 (Coursework) or Paper
4 (Alternative to Coursework). It will be examined in Paper 1 and Paper 2
ONLY.
SECTION 2 Depth Studies

8 Russia, 1905–41
KEY QUESTIONS
8A  Why did the tsarist regime collapse in 1917?
8B  How did the Bolsheviks gain and hold on to power?
8C  How did Stalin gain and hold on to power? What was the
impact of Stalin’s economic policies?

Here is a poster from 1920 showing a sailor from the Kronstadt
naval base near St Petersburg. It was produced by the
Communists. The text says ‘Long live the vanguard of the
Revolution: the Red Fleet’.
On pages 215–218 you will be looking at the period from which this
poster comes. Try to answer the following questions (you will have
to guess intelligently) and then keep your answers and check
whether you were right.
1  How would you describe the poster’s view of the sailor – for
example, cowardly, weak, brave?
2  Does this mean the sailors support the Communists or the other
way around?
3  Do you get the impression that Russia is a peaceful place at this
time?
4  Would you expect the relationship between the Communists and
the sailors to change in the next few months?
In 1905 R ussia was a vast but backward agricultural country. Its industry was
underdeveloped, its people mainly poor  and uneducated. It was ruled by a
TSAR who had complete pow er. In March 1917 t he Tsar was overthrown and
in November of the same year the Bolsheviks took over the running of
Russia. Over the next 30 y ears the country was transformed by STALIN into a
modern industrial state which became a world SUPERPOWER.
In 8A you will investigate why the Tsar’s regime survived one revolution in
1905 bu t then collapsed in 1917. What changed?
In 8B you will explore how the Bolsheviks (Communists) under LENIN seized
power in 1917 a nd, against all the odds , held on to pow er.
In 8C you will look at how Stalin became the new leader of Russia (by this
time the USSR) after Lenin, how he changed the SOVIET UNION, and the
consequences of his rule for his people.
Timeline
This timeline shows the period you will be covering in this chapter. Some of
the key dates are filled in already. To help you gain a complete picture of the
period, m ake your own much larger version of the timeline and add ot her
details to it as you work through the chapter.

8A Why did the tsarist regime collapse
in 1917?
FOCUS
When Nicholas II was crowned tsar of Russia in 1894, the crowds
flocked in their thousands to St Petersburg to cheer the new tsar,
whom they called ‘the Little Father of Russia’.
Twenty-three years later, he had been removed from power and he
and his family were prisoners. Perhaps the Tsar might have asked
himself how this had happened, but commentators had predicted
collapse long before 1917. In fact some people think the surprise is
that the Tsar had actually survived so long. How could one man rule
such a vast and troubled empire? So your focus in 8.1 is why,
having survived for 23 troubled years, did the Tsar’s regime finally
collapse in 1917?
Focus Points
•  Why did the Tsar face a revolution in 1905?
•  How did the Tsar survive the 1905 Revolution?
•  How well did the tsarist regime deal with the difficulties of ruling
Russia up to 1914?
•  How far was the Tsar weakened by the First World War?
•  Why was the revolution of March 1917 successful?
The Russian empire
As you can see from Figure 1 Russia was a vast empire, more than 3000
miles wide and very varied with arctic waste to the north and hot desert to
the south.
FIGURE 1
The Russian empire in 1900.
The Tsar and his Government
Autocracy
This huge and diverse empire was ruled by one man, the tsar, who had
absolute pow er. By the early twentieth century most European countries had
given their people at least some say in how they were run, but Tsar Nicholas
was still committed to the idea of AUTOCRACY.
He would not listen to any calls for political reform or greater DEMOCRACY
in Russia. Most Russian nobles supported him in this view. He also had the
support of the army commanders, the Church and the bureaucracy that ran the
government.
SOURCE 2
Let all know that I, devoting all my strength to the welfare of the
people, will uphold the principle of autocracy as firmly and as
unflinchingly as my late unforgettable father.
Part of Tsar Nicholas II’s coronation speech
in 1894.
Think!
1  Draw up your own chart to summarise the tsarist system of
government.
2  Describe and explain at least two ways in which Nicholas II
made Russia’s government weak.
Control and repression
Through the army, Church and bureaucracy the Tsar exercised oppr essive
control over the Russian people. Newspapers were censored and pol itical
parties banned. The police had a special force with 10,000 of ficers whose
job w as to concentrate on dealing with political oppon ents of the regime. The
Tsar’s SECRET POLICE force, the OKHRANA, was very effective, sending
thousands to prison or exile in Siberia. Backing them up was the army,
particularly the terrifying COSSACK regiments, which could be relied on to put
down any disturbances. A loyal army was crucial to the Tsar’s regime.
In the countryside each peasant belonged to a m i r or village commune which
controlled their daily lives. Each area had a ‘land captain’ – a local noble
who dealt with crimes and disputes. Larger regions had governors –
aristocrats appointed by the Tsar. They had pow ers to arrest people, put
down trouble, censor newspapers and so on. Some of them were tyrants
running their regions like little police states.
There were some elected officials in towns and district councils called
Z E M S T V A, but these were dom inated by the nobles and professional classes
(such as doctors, lawyers). The z e m s t v a did some good w ork in areas such
as health and education and gave people useful experience in running local
government. Some people wanted a national z e m s t v o through which elected
representatives could help run the country but the Tsar and his regime would
not accept this.
Profile
Tsar Nicholas II
•  Born 1868.
•  Crowned as tsar in 1896.
•  Married to Alexandra of Hesse (a granddaughter of Queen
Victoria).
•  Both the Tsar and his wife were totally committed to the idea of
the tsar as autocrat – absolute ruler of Russia.
•  Nicholas regularly rejected requests for reform.
•  He was interested in the Far East. This got him into a disastrous
war with Japan in 1905.
•  He was not very effective as a ruler, unable to concentrate on the
business of being tsar.
•  He was a kind, loving family man but did not really understand
the changes Russia was going through.
•  By 1917 he had lost control of Russia and abdicated.
•  In 1918 he and his family were shot by Bolsheviks during the
Russian CIVIL WAR.
Chaos and incompetence
There is a different story to tell though. There had been some great tsars in
the past but most historians and even some of the Tsar’s supporters at the
time agreed that Tsar Nicholas was not actually a very good r uler.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe at least two ways in which the
Tsar’s Government crushed opponents.
•  You should be able to explain the zemstvo.
•  Make sure you can explain at least one weakness of the
government system.
He worked hard but he avoided making big decisions and wasted time by
getting involved in the tiniest details of government. He personally answered
letters from peasants and appointed provincial midwives. He even wrote out
the instructions for the royal car to be brought round! He did not delegate
day-to-day tasks. In a country as vast as Russia this was a major problem.
Nicholas also felt threatened by able and talented ministers. He refused to
chair the Council of Ministers because he disliked confrontation. He
encouraged rivalry between ministers which caused chaos, because different
government departments refused to co-operate with each other. He also
appointed family members and friends from the court to important positions
even though many were incompetent or even corrupt, making huge fortunes
from bribes.
The Russian people
The nationalities
Many people in the Russian empire were not actually Russians. Only 40 pe r
cent of the Tsar’s subjects spoke Russian as their first language. These other
groups were called NATIONALITIES because they really belonged to a different
nation. Some nationalities, for example the Cossacks, were loyal to the Tsar.
Others, for example the Poles and Finns, hated Russian rule. Jews were seen
as a separate group and often suffered racial prejudice and even attacks
called pog roms which were encouraged by the government.
SOURCE 3
Workers’ living conditions: a dormitory in
Moscow. Urban workers made up about 4
per cent of the population in 1900.
Peasants and the countryside
Around 80 pe r cent of Russia’s popu lation were peasants who lived in
communes. There were some prosperous peasant farmers called KULAKS, but
living and working conditions for most peasants were dreadful. Farming was
backward and primitive. There was no education. Hunger and disease were
common. Life expectancy was only 40 y ears in some areas. Life was strictly
controlled. Worse still, a rising popu lation meant there was a shortage of
good-quality land.
Despite this, mainly because of the teachings of the Church, most peasants
were loyal to the Tsar, although some peasants did support the RADICAL
political parties who wanted to take the good f arming land from the
aristocrats and the Church and give it to the peasants.
Industrial workers and the cities
From the later nineteenth century, the tsars had been keen to see Russia
become an industrial pow er. The senior minister Sergei Witte introduced
policies that led to the rapid growth of industry. Oil and coal production
trebled; iron production quadrupled. Some peasants left the countryside to
work in these newly developing industries. However, their living conditions
hardly improved. They were jammed into slum housing in the cities,
especially St Petersburg and Moscow. Within a short distance of the Tsar’s
glittering palaces workers suffered from illnesses, alcoholism, appalling
working conditions and low pay. TRADE UNIONS were illegal so there was no
way to protest. Most workers were probably no better off than the peasants.
FIGURE 4
Graph showing the growth of St Petersburg.
The capitalists
As a result of INDUSTRIALISATION, a new class began to emerge in Russia –
the CAPITALISTS. They were landowners, industrialists, bankers, traders and
businessmen. Until this time, Russia had had only a small middle class which
included people such as shopkeepers, lawyers and university lecturers. The
capitalists increased the size of Russia’s middle class, particularly in the
towns. Their main concerns were the management of the economy, although
the capitalists were also concerned about controlling their workforce.
Clashes between workers and capitalists were to play an important role in
Russia’s history in the years up to 1917.
Think!
Look back at Source 3. Do you think these men would be more
likely to be influenced by the Church and its message of loyalty to
the Tsar or the revolutionary views of the Social Democratic Party?
Explain your answer.
Political opposition to the Tsar
The tsarist government faced oppos ition from three particular political
groups.
Liberals
From the later 1800s  many middle-class men and some women had received
a university education. The universities became hotbeds of student
radicalism. This meant that by the early 1900s  many middle-class people
wanted greater democracy in Russia. They demanded pol itical reform,
particularly a DUMA, an assembly similar to the British Parliament. They
pointed out that Britain still had a king but also a pow erful parliament. These
people were called liberals.
Radicals
Two other groups were more deeply oppos ed to the Tsar. They believed that
violent revolution was the answer to the people’s troubles.
•  The SOCIALIST REVOLUTIONARIES (SRs) were a radical movement. Their
main aim was to carve up the huge estates of the nobility and hand them
over to the peasants. They believed in violent struggle. They were
responsible for the assassination of two government officials, as well as
the murder of a large number of Okhrana (police) agents and spies. They
had support in the towns and the countryside.
•  The Social Democratic Party was a smaller but more disciplined party
which followed the ideas of Karl Marx (see Factfile). In 1903 t he party
split itself into Bolsheviks and MENSHEVIKS. The Bolsheviks (led by
Lenin) believed it was the job of  the party to create a revolution whereas
the Mensheviks believed Russia was not ready for revolution.
Factfile
Marxist theory
•  Karl Marx was a German writer and political thinker. He believed
that history was dominated by class struggle and revolution.
•  Marx believed that the middle classes would take control from
the monarchy and aristocracy.
•  There would then be a revolution in which the workers (the
proletariat) would overthrow the middle classes.
•  For a short while the Communist Party would rule but eventually
there would be no need for any government as all would live in a
peaceful communist society.
Both of these organisations were illegal and many of their members had been
executed or sent in exile to Siberia. Many of the leading Social Democrat
leaders were forced to live abroad (including Vladimir Ilyich Lenin who
will figure significantly in this story later on).
In the Tsar’s autocratic system there was no way for these oppos ition groups
to voi ce their discontent. It all added up to a very volatile situation. Only the
formidable forces of the state were keeping the lid on the tensions. In 1905
the lid was about to blow.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you know the difference between the SRs and the
Social Democrats.
•  It is also important to make sure you don’t get Bolsheviks and
Mensheviks mixed up!
SOURCE 5
Cartoon showing the tsarist system. This was
published in Switzerland by exiled opponents
of the Tsar.
Source Analysis
Source 5 was drawn by opponents of the Tsar’s regime in exile.
Discuss how far you think it is an accurate view of Russian society.
Think about:
•  ways in which its claims are supported by the information and
sources in the text
•  ways in which its claims are not supported by the information and
sources in the text
•  aspects of life in Russia that are not covered by the drawing.
ACTIVITY
You are a minister of the Tsar in 1903. Write a report for him,
informing him truthfully of the situation in Russia.
Your report should mention:
•  inefficient and corrupt government
•  the condition of the peasants
•  conditions for the workers
•  opposition groups.
The 1905 revolution
You have already seen there was a lot of discontent in Russia. It would
hardly be a surprise if this erupted in revolution at some stage. In 1905 i t did.
What finally turned the discontent into revolution?
Economic problems
In the late nineteenth century Russian industry and cities had grown rapidly.
This caused stresses and strains as people floode d into towns and cities,
often living and working in appalling conditions. After 1900 t his growth
stoppe d. Russia was hit by ECONOMIC DEPRESSION – wages fell, factories and
mines closed and people were thrown out of work. This led to strikes and
unrest. When the police set up ‘approved’ trade unions to try to control the
workers, this only led to more strikes.
The problems deepened with a poor  harvest in 1901 w hich led to hunger and
peasant revolt. The only answer the Government could come up with to this
growing discontent was further repression (see Source 6).
War with Japan
The Tsar had long been worried about Japan. By the early 1900s  it was
becoming a modern, industrialised pow er with up-to-date armed forces. It
was also showing an interest in Manchuria, a territory which bordered
Russia. The rivalry and suspicion erupted into ope n war in February 1904.
The Tsar hoped that war against Japan might help to unite his subjects behind
him. This might have happened if he had been successful, but the war
resulted in a series of disastrous defeats on land and at sea. Despite the
defeats the Tsar refused to seek peace. The war became increasingly
expensive and resulted in higher taxes, higher food pr ices and shortages.
Most Russians did not care about Japan or the Tsar’s lands thousands of
miles away. Those who did care were angered by the incompetence of the
Tsar and his commanders in losing to the Japanese. As 1904 e nded and
winter began to bite, the discontent reached new heights.
SOURCE 6
A third of Russia lives under emergency legislation. The numbers
of the regular police and of the secret police are continually
growing. The prisons are overcrowded with convicts and political
prisoners. At no time have religious persecutions [of Jews] been so
cruel as they are today. In all cities and industrial centres soldiers
are employed and equipped with live ammunition to be sent out
against the people. Autocracy is an outdated form of government
that may suit the needs of a central African tribe but not those of
the Russian people who are increasingly aware of the culture of the
rest of the world.
Part of a letter from the landowner and writer
Leo Tolstoy to the Tsar in 1902. The letter
was an open letter – it was published openly
as well as being sent to the Tsar.
Bloody Sunday
These tensions all came together on Sunday, 22 J anuary 1905. A crowd of
200,000 pr otesters, led by the priest Father Gapon, came to the Winter
Palace to give a petition to the Tsar (see Source 8). Many of the marchers
carried pictures of the Tsar to show their respect for him.
The Tsar was not in the Winter Palace. He had left St Petersburg when the
first signs of trouble appeared. The protesters were met by a regiment of
soldiers and mounted Cossacks. Without warning, the soldiers opened fire
and the Cossacks charged. It was a decisive day. The Tsar finally lost the
respect of the ordinary people of Russia. Bloody  Sunday sparked a wave of
strikes and disturbances which quickly spread to other cities.
SOURCE 7
Lord, we workers, our children, our wives and our old, helpless
parents have come, Lord, to seek truth, justice and protection from
you.
We are impoverished and oppressed, unbearable work is imposed
on us, we are despised and not recognised as human beings. We
are treated as slaves, who must bear their fate and be silent. We
have suffered terrible things, but we are pressed ever deeper into
the abyss of poverty, ignorance and lack of rights.
We ask but little: to reduce the working day to eight hours and to
provide a minimum wage of a rouble a day.
Officials have taken the country into a shameful war. We working
men have no say in how the taxes we pay are spent.
Do not refuse to help your people. Destroy the wall between
yourself and your people.
From the Petition to the Tsar presented by
Father Gapon, 1905.
Source Analysis
1  Read Source 7. Make two lists:
    a)  the petitioners’ complaints
    b)  their demands.
2  Are these demands revolutionary demands? Explain your answer.
3  Choose two words to sum up the attitude of the petitioners to the
Tsar in Source 7.
4  a)  Describe in detail what you can see in Source 8.
    b)  What do you think the artist is trying to show?
    c)  How might this event change the attitude of the petitioners
(see your answer to question 3)?
SOURCE 8
A painting of Bloody Sunday by the Russian
artist Ivan Vladimirov, painted soon after the
event. Vladimirov was a Realist painter.
Realists tended to use a very vivid and lifelike
style of painting and many of them used this
style to highlight what they saw as social or
political problems.
Think!
Source 8 was published in France, where many opponents of the
Tsar lived in exile. How might they have made use of this image and
others like it?
SOURCE 9
Saturday 21 January
A clear frosty day. Went for a long walk. Since yesterday all the
factories and workshops in St Petersburg have been on strike.
Troops have been brought in to strengthen the garrison. The
workers have conducted themselves calmly hitherto. At the head of
the workers is some socialist priest: Gapon.
Sunday 22 January
A painful day. There have been serious disorders in St Petersburg
because workmen wanted to come up to the Winter Palace. Troops
had to open fire in several places in the city; there were many
killed and wounded. God, how painful and sad! Mama arrived from
town, straight to church. I lunched with all the others. Went for a
walk with Misha. Mama stayed overnight.
Extracts from the Tsar’s diary over the
weekend of Bloody Sunday.
FOCUS TASK 8.1
Why was the Tsar facing revolution in 1905?
The diagram show a range of factors which contributed to the
outbreak of revolution in 1905. Historians often organise such
causes into categories:
1  Study the factors in the diagram above. On your own copy of the
diagram colour code the factors you think are structural factors
and the factors you think are trigger factors.
2  Add brief notes to your diagram to explain how each of the
factors was either a structural or trigger factor.
3  The X Factor. Think about this question:
Long-term or structural
factorsShort-term or trigger factors
Underlying factors which make
a revolution possible or likely.
They are the logs on a fire
before a spark sets it alight.
They can build up for a long
time.Factors which spark off the
revolution but without the
structural factors they could not
cause a revolution. Factors like
these help to explain why the
revolution happened in 1905
rather than an earlier date or a
later date.
‘Without X the 1905 Revolution would never have happened’. How
far do you agree?
Look through the factors again and decide which factor you think
would be best candidate to be the X Factor. When you have
decided, write a paragraph explaining your decision.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can remember your X factor from question 3 and
two others to compare with it. This will be useful in writing about
relative importance for Paper 4 questions.
How did the Tsar survive?
Tsarism in danger
Bloody  Sunday sparked a wave of strikes which spread to other cities.
Barricades appeared in the streets accompanied by riots and violence. The
Tsar’s uncle was assassinated and it seemed the Tsar might well lose control
of Russia. All sorts of groups joined the workers demanding change. These
included:
•  the liberals and middle classes who wanted civil rights and a say in
government
•  students who wanted freedom in the universities
•  the nationalities demanding independence.
However, they did not combine to form a united oppos ition.
In June the sailors on Battleship Potemkin mutinied. This was dangerous for
the Tsar who needed the armed forces to remain loyal. In the countryside,
PEASANTS attacked LANDLORDS and seized land. Workers’ councils (or
SOVIETS) were formed, be coming particularly strong in St Petersburg and
Moscow. Revolutionaries like TROTSKY returned from exile to join in. In
September a GENERAL STRIKE began which paralysed Russian industry.
Things looked very bleak for the Tsar and his regime.
The October Manifesto
Things were so bad at the end of September that the Tsar was persuaded,
unwillingly, to issue the October Manifesto (see Source 11). This offered the
people an elected parliament called the Duma, the right to free speech and
the right to form political parties. This divided the Tsar’s oppon ents. The
liberals were delighted, feeling this had achieved their main aim, and the
middle classes, desperate to end the violence and disorder, now supported
moves to end the revolution.
SOURCE 10
Events of the greatest historical importance are developing in
Russia. The proletariat has risen against tsarism. The slogan of the
heroic St. Petersburg proletariat, “Death or freedom!” is
reverberating throughout Russia. The revolution is spreading. The
government is beginning to lose its head. From the policy of bloody
repression it is attempting to change to economic concessions to
save itself by throwing a sop to the workers or promising the nine-
hour day. But the lesson of Bloody Sunday cannot be forgotten.
The demand of the insurgent St. Petersburg workers must become
the demand of all the striking workers. Immediate overthrow of the
government — this was the slogan with which even the St.
Petersburg workers who had believed in the tsar answered the
massacre of January 9th. Their leader, the priest Georgi Gapon,
declared after that bloody day: “We no longer have a tsar. A river
of blood divides the tsar from the people. Long live the fight for
freedom!”
‘Long live the revolutionary proletariat!’ say we.
Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin (see page
213) commenting on events in Russia in
1905.
SOURCE 11
The oath which We took as Tsar compels Us to use all Our
strength, intelligence and power to put a speedy end to this unrest
which is so dangerous for the State. The relevant authorities have
been ordered to take measures to deal with direct outbreaks of
disorder and to protect people who only want to go about their daily
business in peace.
However, in view of the need to speedily implement earlier
measures to pacify the country, we have ordered the government to
take the following measures in fulfilment of our unbending will:
1. Fundamental civil freedoms will be granted to the population, including freedom of
conscience, speech, assembly and association.
2. Participation in the Duma will be granted to those classes of the population which are at
present deprived of voting powers, insofar as is possible in the short period before the
calling of the Duma, and this will lead to the development of a universal franchise.
3. It is established as an unshakeable rule that no law can come into force without its
approval by the State Duma and representatives of the people will be given the
opportunity to take real part in the supervision of the legality of government bodies.
We call on all true sons of Russia to remember the homeland, to
help put a stop to this unprecedented unrest and, together with this,
to devote all their strength to the restoration of peace to their native
land.
Nicholas II
Tsar of all the Russias
Extracts from the Tsar’s October Manifesto.
The army restores tsarist rule
The Tsar made peace with Japan and brought his troops  back to help put
down the trouble. To ensure their loyalty he promised them better pay and
conditions. Now the Government moved to restore order.
•  In December 1905 t he leaders of the St Petersburg and Moscow soviets
were arrested. This led to fighting in Moscow and other cities but the
workers were no match for the army and their resistance was crushed.
•  In the countryside it took much of 1906 t o bring peasant unrest under
control. The Tsar promised financial help in setting up a peasants’ bank to
help them buy land but it was force that won the day. Troops  were sent out
in huge numbers to crush the peasants and the nationalities. Thousands
were executed or imprisoned. Beatings and rape were used to terrify
peasants into submission.
It was clear that no revolution would succeed if the army stayed loyal to the
Tsar.
SOURCE 12
An illustration from the anti-tsarist Russian
magazine Leshii, published in 1906. The title
was ‘Nightmare: the aftermath of a Cossack
punishment expedition’.
Source Analysis
1  Read Source 10. Do you think it is more useful as evidence about
the revolution or about Lenin? Explain your answer.
2  Read Source 11. Do you think the October Manifesto was a
clever move?
3  Do you get the impression the Tsar believed in the October
Manifesto?
4  Do you think ‘Nightmare’ is a good title for Source 12?
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can list two examples of the
weaknesses/mistakes of the revolutionaries.
•  Also make sure you can explain two measures taken by the Tsar
which helped him survive.
FOCUS TASK 8.2
How did the Tsar survive the 1905 revolution?
Copy and complete the diagram. Describe how each of the factors
helped the Tsar survive and bring Russia back under control. We
have started one branch for you.
All the different groups – workers, peasants, liberals etc. – had
different aims and never united together to bring down the Tsar’s
Government.
The troubled years, 1905–14
The Tsar survived the 1905 r evolution, but some serious questions remained.
Nicholas needed to reform Russia and satisfy at least some of the
discontented groups that had joined the revolution in 1905. The Duma
deputies who gathered for its first meeting in 1906 w ere hopeful that they
could help to steer Russia on a new course. They were soon disappointed
(see Source 14). The Tsar continued to rule without taking any serious notice
of them. The first and second Dumas were very critical of the Tsar. They
lasted less than a year before Nicholas sent them home. In 1907 T sar
Nicholas changed the voting rules so that his oppon ents were not elected to
the Duma. This third Duma lasted until 1912, m ainly because it was much
less critical of the Tsar than the previous two. But by 1912 e ven this ‘loyal’
Duma was becoming critical of the Tsar’s ministers and pol icies.
FIGURE 13
Agricultural and industrial production, 1890–
1913.
SOURCE 14
The two hostile sides stood confronting each other. The court side
of the hall resounded with orchestrated cheers as the Tsar
approached the throne. But the Duma deputies remained
completely silent. It was a natural expression of our feelings
towards the monarch, who in the twelve years of his reign had
managed to destroy all the prestige of his predecessors. The
feeling was mutual: not once did the Tsar glance towards the Duma
side of the hall. Sitting on the throne he delivered a short,
perfunctory speech in which he promised to uphold the principles
of autocracy.
From the memoirs of Duma deputy
Obolensky, published in 1925. He is
describing the first session of the Duma in
April 1906.
Stolypin’s reforms
In 1906 t he Tsar appointed a tough new prime minister – Peter STOLYPIN.
Stolypin used a ‘carrot and stick’ approach to Russia’s problems.
•  The stick: He came dow n hard on strikers, protesters and revolutionaries.
Over 20,000 w ere exiled and ove r 1000 h anged (the noose came to be
known as ‘Stolypin’s necktie’). This brutal suppression effectively killed
off oppos ition to the regime in the countryside until after 1914.
•  The carrot: Stolypin also tried to win over the peasants with the ‘carrot’
they had always wanted – land. He allowed wealthier peasants, the kulaks,
to opt  out of the m i r communes and buy up land. These kulaks prospered
and in the process created larger and more efficient farms. Production did
increase significantly (see Figure 13). On the other hand, 90 pe r cent of
land in the fertile west of Russia was still run by inefficient communes in
1916. Farm sizes remained small even in Ukraine, Russia’s best farmland.
Most peasants still lived in poor  conditions and remained discontented.
SOURCE 15
Year StrikesStrikers
1905 13,9952,863,173
1906 6,1141,108,406
1907 3,573740,074
1908 892176,101
1909 340 64,166
1910 222 46,623
1911 466105,110
1912 2,032725,491
1913 2,404887,096
1914 3,5341,337,458
These figures were compiled by the Tsar’s
Ministry of Trade and Industry.
Stolypin also tried to boos t Russia’s industries. There was impressive
economic growth between 1908 a nd 191 1. But Russia was still far behind
modern industrial pow ers such as Britain, Germany and the USA.
Stolypin was assassinated in 1911, bu t the Tsar was about to sack him
anyway. He worried that Stolypin was trying to change Russia too m uch.
Nicholas had already blocked some of Stolypin’s plans for basic education
for the people and regulations to protect factory workers. The Tsar was
influenced by the landlords and members of the court. They saw Stolypin’s
reforms as a threat to the traditional Russian society in which everyone knew
their place.
SOURCE 16
Let those in power make no mistake about the mood of the people
… never were the Russian people … so profoundly revolutionised
by the actions of the government, for day by day, faith in the
government is steadily waning.
Guchkov, a Russian conservative in the
Duma, 1913. By 1913, even staunch
supporters of the Tsar were beginning to
want change.
Rising discontent
Relations between the Tsar and his people became steadily worse. The year
1913 s aw huge celebrations for the 300t h anniversary of the Romanovs’ rule
in Russia. The celebrations were meant to bring the country together, but
enthusiasm was limited.
Think!
1  Make two lists:
    a)  Stolypin’s achievements
    b)  Stolypin’s failings.
2  If you were a senior adviser to the Tsar, which of Sources 13–16
would worry you most? Explain your answer.
Discontent grew, especially among the growing industrial working class in
the cities. The industrial growth had not really helped them. The profits were
going to the capitalists, or they were being paid back to banks in France
which had loaned the money to pay for much of Russia’s industrial growth.
Very little of this new wealth found its way back to the urban workers. Their
wages stayed low while the cost of food a nd housing was rising. Living and
working conditions had not really improved – they were still appalling.
Strikes were on the rise (see Source 15), including the highly publicised
Lena gold field strike where troops  opened fire on striking miners.
The army and pol ice dealt with these problems and for the Tsar’s oppon ents
it must have seemed as if the Tsar’s Government were firmly in control.
However, some of the Tsar’s supporters were less sure (see Source 16).
Industrialists were concerned by the way the Tsar chose to appoint loyal but
unimaginative and sometimes incompetent ministers.
Rasputin
Some of the Tsar’s supporters were particularly alarmed about the influence
of a strange and dangerous figure – Gregory Yefimovich, generally known as
Rasputin. The Tsar’s son Alexis was very ill with a blood di sease called
haemophilia. Through hypnosis, it appeared that Rasputin could control the
disease. He was greeted as a miracle worker by the TSARINA (the Tsar’s
wife). Before long, Rasputin was also giving her and the Tsar advice on how
to run the country. People in Russia were very suspicious of Rasputin. He
was said to be a drinker and a womaniser. His name means ‘disreputable’.
The Tsar’s oppon ents seized on Rasputin as a sign of the Tsar’s weakness
and unfitness to rule Russia. The fact that the Tsar either didn’t notice their
concern or, worse still, didn’t care showed just how out of touch he was.
SOURCE 17
Russian cartoon published in 1916. The
caption reads: ‘The Russian Tsars at home’.
Source Analysis
Look at Source 17. How does the cartoonist suggest that Rasputin
is an evil influence on the Tsar and Tsarina?
FOCUS TASK 8.3
How well was the Tsar’s Government dealing with the
difficulties of ruling Russia up to 1914?
Here are some issues facing the Tsar’s Government. Give the
Government a score between 1 and 5 to say how well it was doing
on each issue. Write a comment to explain your reasons for each
score.
•  Providing strong leadership and running the country effectively
•  Growing modern industry to make Russia powerful
•  Making the workers more contented to reduce strikes and unrest
•  Making agriculture more productive and efficient
•  Improving the lives of the peasants
•  Responding to the demands of people for a say in government
•  Dealing with opposition within Russia
•  Defending the country from its enemies
Revision Tip
A common question about this period is how stable Russia was
before 1914. Was it so stable that it could have survived if there
had been no war? To prepare for this kind of question make sure
you can explain:
•  two ways in which Russia could be seen as stable before 1914
•  two ways in which Russia was unstable in the period.
War and revolution
In August 1914 R ussia entered the First World War. Tensions in the country
seemed to disappear. The Tsar seemed genuinely popu lar with his people
and there was an instant display of patriotism. The good f eeling, however,
was very short-lived. Before long the Tsar began to lose the support of key
sectors of Russian society.
The army
The Russian army was a huge army of conscripts. At first, the soldiers were
enthusiastic. They felt that they were fighting to defend their country against
the Germans rather than showing any loyalty to the Tsar. Russian soldiers
fought bravely, but they stood l ittle chance against the German army. They
were badly led and treated appallingly by their aristocrat officers. They were
also short of rifles, ammunition, artillery and shells. Many did not even have
boots.
The Tsar took personal command of the armed forces in September 1915.
This made little difference to the war, since Nicholas was not a particularly
able commander. However, it did mean that people held Nicholas personally
responsible for the defeats and the blunders. The defeats and huge losses
continued throughout 1916. It is not surprising that by 1917 t here was deep
discontent in the army.
FOCUS TASK 8.4
How far was the Tsar weakened by the First World War?
The First World War had a massive impact on Russia. Your task is
to use the material on pages 204–205 to present an overview of
how the war affected four different groups of people in Russian
society. The groups are:
•  the army
•  the workers
•  the middle classes
•  the aristocracy.
As you read through pages 204–205 make notes about the impact
of war on each group and how far that weakened the Tsar’s ability
to rule Russia effectively.
Peasants and workers
It did not take long for the strain of war to alienate the peasants and the
workers. The huge casualty figures left many widows and orphans needing
state war pensions which they did not always receive.
Despite the losses, food pr oduction remained high until 1916. By then, the
Government could not always be relied on to pay for the food pr oduced. The
Government planned to take food by  force but abandoned the idea because it
feared it might spark a widespread revolt.
By 1916 t here was much discontent in the cities. War contracts created an
extra 3.5 m illion industrial jobs between 1914 a nd 1916. The workers got
little in the way of extra wages. They also had to cope with even worse
overcrowding than before the war. There were fuel and food s hortages. The
rail network could not cope with the needs of the army, industry and the
popu lations of the cities. The prices of almost everything got higher and
higher. As 1916 t urned into 1917, m any working men and women stood a nd
shivered in bread queues and cursed the Tsar.
SOURCE 18
The army had neither wagons nor horses nor first aid supplies …
We visited the Warsaw station where there were about 17,000 men
wounded in battle. At the station we found a terrible scene: on the
platform in dirt, filth and cold, on the ground, even without straw,
wounded men, who filled the air with heart-rending cries, dolefully
asked: ‘For God’s sake order them to dress our wounds. For five
days we have not been attended to.’
From a report by Michael Rodzianko,
president of the Duma.
The middle classes
The middle classes did not suffer in the same way as the peasants and
workers, but they too w ere unhappy with the Tsar by the end of 1916. Many
middle-class activists in the z e m s t v a were appalled by reports such as
Source 18. They set up their own medical organisations along the lines of the
modern Red Cross, or joined war committees to send other supplies to the
troops . These organisations were generally far more effective than the
government agencies. By 1916 m any industrialists were complaining that
they could not fulfil their war contracts because of a shortage of raw
materials (especially metals) and fuel. In 1915 a n ALLIANCE of Duma
politicians, the Progressive Bloc, had urged the Tsar to work with them in a
more representative style of government that would unite the people. The
Tsar dismissed the Duma a month later.
FIGURE 19
Russian casualties (dead and wounded) in
the First World War.
The aristocracy
The situation was so bad by late 1916 t hat the Council of the United Nobility
was calling for the Tsar to step dow n. The junior officers in the army (mostly
from the aristocrat class) had suffered devastating losses in the war. The
CONSCRIPTION of 13 m illion peasants meant landlords had no workers for
their estates. Most of all, many of the leading aristocrats were appalled by
the influence of Rasputin over the government of Russia (see Source 17).
When the Tsar left Petrograd (the new Russian version of the Germanic name
St Petersburg) to take charge of the army, he left his wife in control of the
country. The fact that she was German started rumours flying in the capital.
There were also rumours of an affair between her and Rasputin. Ministers
were dismissed and then replaced. The concerns were so serious that a group
of leading aristocrats murdered Rasputin in December 1916.
FIGURE 20
Prices in Russia, 1914–17.
SOURCE 21
I asked for an audience and was received by him [the Tsar] on
March 8th. ‘I must tell Your Majesty that this cannot continue much
longer. No one opens your eyes to the true role which this man is
playing. His presence in Your Majesty’s court undermines
confidence in the Supreme Power and may have an evil effect on
the fate of the dynasty and turn the hearts of the people from their
Emperor’ … My report did some good. On March 11th an order
was issued sending Rasputin to Tobolsk; but a few days later, at
the demand of the Empress, this order was cancelled.
M. Rodzianko, president of the Duma, March
1916.
Revision Tip
The war was a critical factor in causing revolution in 1917. Make
sure you can list one example of how the war alienated each of the
key groups: army, peasants and workers, middle classes,
aristocracy.
The March 1917 revolution
As 1917 da wned, few people had great hopes for the survival of the Tsar’s
regime. In January strikes broke out all over Russia. In February the strikes
spread. They were supported and even joined by members of the army. The
Tsar’s best troops  lay dead on the battlefields. These soldiers were recent
conscripts and had more in common with the strikers than their officers. On 7
March workers at the Putilov steelworks in Petrograd went on strike. They
joined with thousands of women – it was International Women’s Day – and
other discontented workers demanding that the Government provide bread.
From 7 to 10 M arch the number of striking workers rose to 250,000. Industry
came to a standstill. The Duma set up a Provisional Committee to take over
the government. The Tsar ordered them to disband. They refused. On 12
March the Tsar ordered his army to put dow n the revolt by force. They
refused. This was the decisive moment. Some soldiers even shot their own
officers and joined the demonstrators. They marched to the Duma demanding
that they take over the government. Reluctantly, the Duma leaders accepted –
they had always wanted reform rather than revolution, but now there seemed
no choice.
FIGURE 22
Peasant risings and strikes, 1914–17.
On the same day, revolutionaries set up the Petrograd Soviet again, and
began taking control of food s upplies to the city. They set up soldiers’
committees, undermining the authority of the officers. Soviets were also set
up in many other towns and cities across Russia, but these others tended to
look to the Petrograd Soviet for leadership and guidance. It was not clear
who was in charge of Russia, but it was obvi ous that the Tsar was not! On 15
March he issued a statement that he was abdicating. There was an initial plan
for his brother Michael to take over, but Michael refused: Russia had
finished with tsars.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain why the mutiny of the army was the key
factor.
FOCUS TASK 8.5
How important was the war in the collapse of the tsarist
regime?
Historians have furiously debated this question since the revolution
took place. There are two main views:
Divide the class into two groups.
One group has to find evidence and arguments to support View 1,
the other to support View 2.
You could compare notes in a class discussion or organise a formal
debate.
FOCUS TASK 8.6
Why was the March 1917 revolution successful?
The Tsar faced a major revolution in 1905 but he survived. Why
was 1917 different? Why was he not able to survive in 1917?
Stage 1
1  Copy the headings in this diagram. They show seven reasons
why the Tsar was forced to abdicate in March 1917.
2  For each of the factors, write one or two sentences explaining
how it contributed to the fall of the Tsar. We have provided some
hints to get you started.
3  Draw lines between any of the factors that seem to be
connected. Label your line explaining what the link is.
Stage 2
4  In pairs or small groups, discuss the following points:
    a)  Which factors were present in 1905?
    b)  Were these same factors more or less serious than in 1905?
    c)  Which factors were not present in 1905?
    d)  Were the new factors decisive in making the March 1917
revolution successful?
Key Question Summary
Why did the tsarist regime collapse in 1917?
1  The Tsar was a weak, indecisive leader whose Government did
not run the country well.
2  The regime had lost the support and loyalty of the people.
    a)  The workers were deeply resentful because their living and
working conditions had improved little despite the wealth
produced by rapidly developing industry.
    b)  The peasants would only be satisfied when they owned the
land. Some improvements had been made by the land
reforms but most peasants were still very poor.
3  The middle classes wanted a say in government. The Tsar
refused to respond to this demand and would not work with the
Duma, even during the war.
4  The Russian army had done badly in the war, losing many lives,
and the Tsar was held responsible for this.
5  The Tsarina and Rasputin had damaged the reputation of the
royal family and made a terrible mess of running the country
when the Tsar went to the warfront. Even top aristocrats and
army generals thought the Tsar was unfit to run Russia.
6  The war had caused extreme shortages in St Petersburg leaving
an angry strike-prone, discontented population which exploded in
March 1917.
7  The crucial factor was when the soldiers mutinied and went over
to the side of the people. The Tsar’s rule had depended on the
army. Without it he was powerless.
8B How did the Bolsheviks gain and
hold on to power?
FOCUS
If you had asked Russians in Petrograd in March 1917 what they
thought of the Bolsheviks, most would probably have said, ‘Who are
the Bolsheviks?’ Yet this small party quite dramatically seized
control of Russia just six months later in November 1917.
Once in power most people thought the Bolsheviks would survive
only a few weeks. They had a formidable set of enemies lined up
against them. In the first few days they could not even get into the
central bank to get money to run the government. Yet, against all
the odds, they did survive.
So your focus in pages 207–220 is all about how they did it. It all
begins with the problems facing the PROVISIONAL GOVERNMENT of
Russia in March 1917.
Focus Points
•  How effectively did the Provisional Government rule Russia in
1917?
•  Why were the Bolsheviks able to seize power in November 1917?
•  Why did the Bolsheviks win the Civil War?
•  How far was the New Economic Policy a success?
Dual power: The Provisional
Government and the Petrograd Soviet
After the abdication of the Tsar the Duma’s Provisional Committee (usually
called the Provisional Government) took charge. The Provisional
Government was made up of many different political parties. When it was
first established the key posts in the Government went to men from a range of
parties in the hope of persuading the people that the different groups in
Russia were being fairly represented.
However, the Provisional Government faced the problem that not all
Russians accepted it as the new government of the country. Many Russians,
especially the industrial workers and many in the army and navy, regarded
the Petrograd Soviet as the body  which truly represented them. Historians
refer to the situation in Russia as ‘dual pow er’, where there were two
possible bodi es who could claim to run the government.
Many Russians hedged their bets, partly to see which of these bodi es might
be better for them and partly to make sure that if one did triumph they would
not be on the losing side. Even some of the politicians in the Provisional
Government also belonged to the Petrograd Soviet, such as Justice Minister
Alexander KERENSKY. It was a confused and confusing time, with many
different parties claiming to represent the people and striving to represent
their followers (see Factfile).
Revision Tip
Make sure you can clearly explain what is meant by dual power.
Factfile
Major political parties in Russia 1917
•  Kadets: Full name was the Constitutional Democratic Party.
They were mostly middle-class liberals. They wanted Russia to
become a parliamentary democracy with full rights for all citizens
including minority groups and Jews. They also supported laws for
improved living and working conditions. Their main support came
from minorities and middle-class professionals, particularly
university professors and lawyers.
•  Progressive Party: Moderate middle-class Liberals with beliefs
fairly similar to the Kadets.
•  Octobrists: Mainly middle-class party, which was originally
founded in 1905. Supported modernising developments in Russia
such as better education and industrialisation. Also supported the
idea of a constitutional monarchy which was clearly impossible
after the Tsar abdicated.
•  Socialist Revolutionary Party: A democratic party which was
more radical and revolutionary than the middle-class parties.
They had the largest amount of popular support with a great deal
of support from peasants and many industrial workers.
Demanded that landlords’ estates be divided up between the
peasants and improved pay and conditions for workers.
Committed to democratic CONSTITUTION.
•  Mensheviks: As you have already seen, the Mensheviks were
one wing of the old Social Democratic Party. They were
communists and they believed that ultimately the workers should
have complete control of the country and all of its assets – land,
industry, roads, railways, housing. Many Mensheviks took part in
the 1905 revolution. Unlike the Bolsheviks they were prepared to
work with other groups to achieve their ultimate aim of a
communist state. There was one Menshevik minister in the
Provisional Government.
•  Bolsheviks: The Bolsheviks were led by VI Lenin. They were
communists like the Mensheviks but they believed that the
workers could only take power by a violent revolution which
would overthrow the existing rulers.
The Provisional Government (March to
October 1917)
The success of the Provisional Government would depend on how well it
handled three key issues:
•  To stay in the war or make peace.
•  To distribute land to the peasants or ask them to wait until elections had
been held.
•  How to feed the starving workers in the cities.
Most ordinary Russians were hoping for instant and radical action. However,
the Provisional Government was dom inated by middle-class liberals,
particularly the Kadets. The Provisional Government promised Russia’s
allies that it would continue the war. It also urged the peasants to be
restrained and wait for elections before taking any land. The plan was to
hold free elections to take place to elect a new Constituent Assembly that
would carry out such a major change. It was a very cautious message for a
people who had just gone through a revolution.
SOURCE 1
The Provisional Government should do nothing now which would
break our ties with the allies. The worst thing that could happen to
us would be separate peace. It would be ruinous for the Russian
revolution, ruinous for international democracy …
As to the land question, we regard it as our duty at the present to
prepare the ground for a just solution of the problem by the
Constituent Assembly.
A Provisional Government minister explains
why Russia should stay in the war, 1917.
Think!
Read Source 1. How popular do you think the Provisional
Government’s policies on the war and land would be with the
peasants and the soldiers?
The Petrograd Soviet
The newly formed Petrograd Soviet held the real pow er in Petrograd. It had
the support of key workers like the railwaymen, and, crucially, the soldiers.
It could control what went on in the city and in reality it had the resources to
undermine anything the Provisional Government decided to do ( see Source
2). Its members were generally more radical than the Provisional
Government. However, it was dom inated by the Socialist Revolutionaries
who supported the idea of a new Constituent Assembly (not least because
they expected to win elections to the new Assembly). The Soviet had a small
number of Bolshevik members but they were outnumbered by Mensheviks
and Socialist Revolutionaries who took a more cautious approach. The
Soviet decided to work with the Provisional Government in the spring and
summer of 1917. But this was not an open-ended promise of support and the
situation was always likely to change.
SOURCE 2
The Provisional Government possesses no real power and its
orders are executed only in so far as this is permitted by the Soviet
of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, which holds in its hands the
most important elements of actual power, such as troops, railroads,
postal and telegraph service.
A letter from Guchkov, minister for war in the
Provisional Government, to General
Alekseyev, 22 March 1917.
Lenin and the rise of the Bolsheviks
Despite this CO-OPERATION one man was determined to push the revolution
further. He was Lenin, leader of the Bolsheviks (see page 213). When he
heard of the March revolution he immediately returned to Russia from exile
in Europe. The Germans even provided him with a special train, hoping that
he might cause more chaos in Russia!
When Lenin arrived at Petrograd station, he set out the Bolshevik programme
in his April Theses. In ten key points he set out the main points of the
Bolshevik position. He condemned Russia’s involvement in the war. He
urged the people to support the Bolsheviks in a second revolution. He
condemned the Provisional Government. He called for land to be given to the
peasants and for the banks to be taken into state control. Lenin’s slogans
‘Peace, Land and Bread’ and ‘All pow er to the soviets’ contrasted sharply
with the cautious message of the Provisional Government. Support for the
Bolsheviks increased quickly (see Source 3 and Figure 4), particularly in the
soviets and in the army. By October party membership was around 500,000
and the Bolsheviks had a majority in the Petrograd Soviet and the Moscow
Soviet and in the All–Russia Congress of Soviets (a sort of parliament where
representatives of the different Soviets met).
SOURCE 3
A painting (made some time afterwards) of
Lenin arriving at Petrograd railway station
returning from exile, 1917. It was made by
the artist Mikhail Sokolov, an opponent of the
tsarist regime.
FIGURE 4
Growth of Bolshevik support, 1917.
SOURCE 5
The Bolshevik speaker would ask the crowd ‘Do you need more
land?’
‘Do you have as much land as the landlords do?’
‘But will the Kerensky government give you land? No, never. It
protects the interests of the landlords. Only our party, the
Bolsheviks, will immediately give you land…’
Several times I tried to take the floor and explain that the
Bolsheviks make promises which they can never fulfil. I used
figures from farming statistics to prove my point; but I saw that the
crowded square was unsuitable for this kind of discussion.
A Menshevik writer, summer 1917.
Source Analysis
Study Source 3, Figure 4 and Source 5. Is it possible to say whether
one is more useful as evidence about Russia in 1917? Use the
sources/figure and your own knowledge to explain your answer.
Revision Tip
List:
•  two weaknesses of the Provisional Government
•  two strengths of the Provisional Government
•  two strengths of the Bolsheviks.
The Provisional Government collapses
In the second half of 1917, t he Provisional Government’s authority steadily
collapsed.
•  The war effort was failing. Soldiers had been deserting in thousands from
the army. Kerensky became minister for war and rallied the army for a
great offensive in June. It was a disaster. The army began to fall apart in
the face of a German counter-attack (see Source 6). The deserters decided
to come home.
•  Desertions were made worse because another element of the Provisional
Government’s policy had failed. The peasants ignored the orders of the
Government to wait. They were simply taking control of the countryside.
The soldiers, who were mostly peasants, did not want to miss their turn
when the land was shared out.
SOURCE 6
A sudden and disastrous change has occurred in the attitude of the
troops … Authority and obedience no longer exist … for hundreds
of miles one can see deserters, armed and unarmed, in good
health and in high spirits, certain they will not be punished.
A Russian officer reporting back to the
Provisional Government, 1917.
July 1917: Kerensky defeats the Bolsheviks
The Provisional Government’s problems got worse in the summer. In July
(the ‘July Days’), Bolshevik-led protests against the war turned into a
rebellion. However, when Kerensky produced evidence that Lenin had been
helped by the Germans, support for the rebellion fell. Lenin, in disguise, fled
to Finland. Kerensky used troops  to crush the rebellion and took over the
government.
However, Kerensky was in a very difficult situation. In the cities, strikes,
lawlessness and violence were rife. The upper and middle classes expected
him to restore order. Kerensky seemed unable to do a nything about this or the
deteriorating economic situation. There was little reason for the ordinary
people of Russia to be grateful to the Provisional Government (see Sources 8
and 9).
SOURCE 7
Troops loyal to the Provisional Government
fire on Bolshevik demonstrators during the
July Days.
SOURCE 8
Cabs and horse-drawn carriages began to disappear. Street-car
service was erratic. The railway stations filled with tramps and
deserting soldiers, often drunk, sometimes threatening. The police
force had vanished in the first days of the Revolution. Now
‘revolutionary order’ was over. Hold-ups and robberies became the
order of the day. Politically, signs of chaos were everywhere.
H.E. Salisbury, Russia in Revolution.
SOURCE 9
Week by week food became scarcer … one had to queue for long
hours in the chill rain … Think of the poorly clad people standing
on the streets of Petrograd for whole days in the Russian winter! I
have listened in the bread-lines, hearing the bitter discontent which
from time to time burst through the miraculous good nature of the
Russian crowd.
John Reed, an American writer who lived in
Petrograd in 1917.
Source Analysis
How far do you think Source 9 is a reliable source about the
situation in Russia under the Provisional Government? Use the
source, your knowledge and the other sources in this section to
explain your answer.
September 1917: Kerensky relies on the
Bolsheviks
Others were also fed up with the Provisional Government. In September
1917, t he army leader Kornilov m arched his troops  towards Moscow,
intending to get rid of the Bolsheviks and the Provisional Government, and
restore order. Kerensky was in an impossible situation. He had some troops
who supported him but they were no match for Kornilov’s. Kerensky turned
to the only group which could save him: his Bolshevik oppon ents. The
Bolsheviks organised themselves into an army which they called the Red
Guards. Kornilov’s troops  refused to fight members of the Soviet so his plans
collapsed.
But it was hardly a victory for Kerensky. In fact, by October Kerensky’s
Government was doom ed.
•  It had tried to carry on the war and failed. It had therefore lost the army’s
support.
•  It had tried to stop the peasants from taking over the land and so lost their
support too.
•  Without peasant support it had failed to bring food i nto the towns and food
prices had spiralled upwards. This had lost the Government any support it
had from the urban workers.
In contrast, the Bolsheviks were promising what the people wanted most
(bread, pe ace, land). It was the Bolsheviks who had removed the threat of
Kornilov. By the end of September 1917, t he Bolsheviks had control of the
Petrograd Soviet and Leon Trotsky was its chairman. They also controlled
the soviets in Moscow and other major cities.
What do y ou think happened next?
Revision Tip
Add to your list from the previous Revision Tip on page 209:
•  two more strengths of the Bolsheviks in late 1917
•  two more weaknesses of the Provisional Government.
FOCUS TASK 8.7
How effectively did the Provisional Government rule Russia in
1917?
Step 1
1  Here is a list of some decisions that faced the Provisional
Government when it took over in March 1917:
    a)  what to do about the war
    b)  what to do about land
    c)  what to do about food.
For each one, say how the Government dealt with it, and what
the result of the action was.
2  Based on your answers to question 1, how effective do you think
the Provisional Government was? Give it a mark out of ten.
Step 2
3  Read through pages 207–211 again. Think about how effectively
the Provisional Government dealt with their opponents:
    •  Petrograd Soviet
    •  Bolsheviks
    •  Kornilov’s attempted COUP.
4  Based on your answers to question 3, would you revise the
score you gave the Government in question 2?
Step 3
5  Now reach an overview score. Out of ten, how effective was the
Provisional Government? Write a paragraph to explain your
score.
The Bolshevik Revolution
By the end of October 1917, L enin was convinced that the time was right for
the Bolsheviks to seize pow er. They had the support of many workers and
control of the Soviet. Lenin convinced the other Bolsheviks to act swiftly. It
was not easy – some, such as Kamenev, felt that Russia was not ready – bu t
neither he nor any other Bolshevik could match Lenin in an argument.
The Bolsheviks seize power
•  During the night of 6 November, the Red Guards led by Leon Trotsky took
control of post offices, bridges and the State Bank.
•  On 7 November, Kerensky awoke to find the Bolsheviks were in control of
most of Petrograd. Through the day, with almost no oppos ition, the Red
Guards continued to take over railway stations and other important targets.
•  On the evening of 7 November, they stormed the Winter Palace (again,
without much oppos ition) and arrested the ministers of the Provisional
Government.
•  Kerensky managed to escape and tried to rally loyal troops . When this
failed, he fled into exile.
•  On 8 November an announcement was made to the Russian people (see
Source 10).
SOURCE 10
The Provisional Government has been overthrown. The cause for
which the people have fought has been made safe: the immediate
proposal of a democratic peace, the end of land owners’ rights,
workers’ control over production, the creation of a Soviet
government. Long live the revolution of workers, soldiers and
peasants.
Proclamation of the Petrograd Soviet, 8
November 1917.
Why did the Bolsheviks succeed?
Despite what they claimed, the Bolsheviks did not have the support of the
majority of the Russian people. So how were they able to carry out their
take-over in November 1917?
•  The unpopu larity of the Provisional Government was a critical factor –
there were no massive demonstrations demanding the return of Kerensky!
•  A second factor was that the Bolsheviks were a disciplined party
dedicated to revolution, even though not all the Bolshevik leaders believed
this was the right way to change Russia.
•  The Bolsheviks had some 800,000 m embers, and their supporters were
also in the right places, including substantial numbers of soldiers and
sailors. (The Bolsheviks were still the only party demanding that Russia
should pull out of the war.)
•  The major industrial centres, and the Petrograd and Moscow Soviets
especially, were also pro-Bolshevik.
•  The Bolsheviks also had some outstanding personalities in their ranks,
particularly Trotsky and their leader Lenin.
Think!
Work in pairs, taking either Lenin or Trotsky.
1  Using Sources 11–16 add extra bullet points to the profiles of
Lenin or Trotsky on page 213 covering:
    •  why he appealed to people
    •  his personal qualities
    •  his strengths as a leader.
2  Finally, write a short (150–200 word) explanation of the
contribution of your individual to the Bolsheviks’ success in 1917.
FOCUS TASK 8.8
Why were the Bolsheviks able to seize power in November
1917?
1  Using the material on pages 212–213 and your answers to
Think! sum up how these two factors contributed to Bolshevik
success:
    a)  Bolshevik organisation
    b)  Bolshevik leadership.
2  Now read Source 15. Below are some of these ‘other mighty
factors at work’. Write some notes under each heading to
explain how each one helped the Bolsheviks. The first has been
done for you with hints for the others:
    • Collapse of the Tsar’s regime - This had left a power vacuum.
It was difficult to set up a new democratic regime which
everybody would support.
    • War (people war-weary, disruption)
    • Army disintegrating (officers and soldiers in St Petersburg)
    • Peasants (had already begun to seize land)
    • Desperate economic situation (desperate people)
Revision Tip
You need to be able to explain at least three factors that brought
the Bolsheviks to power. Ideally, make these factors the three you
think are most important.
Profile
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
•  Born 1870 into a respectable Russian family.
•  Thrown out of Kazan University for his political ideas.
•  Exiled to Siberia 1897–1900.
•  1900–03 lived in various countries writing the revolutionary
newspaper Iskra (‘The Spark’).
•  Leader of the Bolsheviks from 1903.
•  Lived in exile, 1905–17.
•  Led the Bolsheviks to power in November 1917.
Profile
Leon Trotsky
•  Born 1879 into a respectable and prosperous Jewish family.
•  Exceptionally bright at school and university.
•  Politically active – arrested in 1900 and deported to Siberia.
•  Escaped to London in 1902. Met Lenin.
•  Joined the Social Democratic Party, but was Menshevik not
Bolshevik.
•  Imprisoned for his role in the 1905 revolution but escaped.
•  Edited Pravda, the newspaper of the Social Democratic Party.
•  Returned to Russia in 1917. Played a key role in the Bolshevik
Revolution.
•  Became Commissar for War and led the Bolsheviks to victory in
the Civil War 1918-20.
SOURCE 11
Lenin … was the overall planner of the revolution: he also dealt
with internal divisions within the party and provided tight control,
and a degree of discipline and unity which the other parties lacked.
S.J. Lee, The European Dictatorships, 1987.
SOURCE 12
This extraordinary figure [Lenin] was first and foremost a
professional revolutionary. He had no other occupation. A man of
iron will and inflexible ambition, he was absolutely ruthless and
used human beings as mere material for his purpose … his
ordinary appearance disposed the crowd in his favour. ‘He is not
one of the gentlefolk, he is one of us’, they would say.
The Times, writing about Lenin after his
death, 1924.
SOURCE 13
The struggle was headed by Lenin who guided the Party’s Central
Committee, the editorial board of, and who kept in touch with the
Party organisations in the provinces … He frequently addressed
mass rallies and meetings. Lenin’s appearance on the platform
inevitably triggered off the cheers of the audience. Lenin’s brilliant
speeches inspired the workers and soldiers to a determined
struggle.
Soviet historian Y. Kukushkin, History of the
USSR, 1981.
SOURCE 14
Now that the great revolution has come, one feels that however
intelligent Lenin may be he begins to fade beside the genius of
Trotsky.
Mikhail Uritsky, 1917. Uritsky was a Bolshevik
activist and went on to play an important role
in Bolshevik governments after 1917.
SOURCE 15
The [November] Revolution has often and widely been held to have
been mainly Lenin’s revolution. But was it? Certainly Lenin had a
heavier impact on the course [of events] than anyone else. The
point is, however, that great historical changes are brought about
not only by individuals. There were other mighty factors at work as
well in Russia in 1917 … Lenin simply could not have done or even
co-ordinated everything.
Historian Robert Service, writing in 1990.
SOURCE 16
Under the influence of his [Trotsky’s] tremendous activity and
blinding success, certain people close to Trotsky were even
inclined to see in him the real leader of the Russian revolution … It
is true that during that period, after the thunderous success of his
arrival in Russia and before the July days, Lenin did keep rather in
the background, not speaking often, not writing much, but largely
engaged in directing organisational work in the Bolshevik camp,
whilst Trotsky thundered forth at meetings in Petrograd. Trotsky’s
most obvious gifts were his talents as an orator and as a writer. I
regard Trotsky as probably the greatest orator of our age. In my
time I have heard all the greatest parliamentarians and popular
tribunes of socialism and very many famous orators of the
bourgeois world and I would find it difficult to name any of them
whom I could put in the same class as Trotsky.
From Revolutionary Silhouettes by Anatoly
Lunacharsky, published in 1918. The book
was a series of portraits of leading
revolutionaries. The author was a Bolshevik
activist and knew Lenin and Trotsky well.
Lenin in power
Lenin and the Bolsheviks had promised the people bread, pe ace and land.
Lenin knew that if he failed to deliver, the Bolsheviks would suffer the same
fate as the Provisional Government.
Lenin immediately set up the Council of People’s Commissars (the
Sovnarkom). It issued its first decree on 8 November, announcing that Russia
was asking for peace with Germany. There followed an enormous number of
decrees from the new government that aimed to strengthen the Bolsheviks’
hold on pow er (see Factfile). The peasants were given the nobles’ lands. The
factories and industries were put into the hands of the workers. The
Bolsheviks were given pow er to deal ruthlessly with their oppon ents – and
they did (see page 215).
FIGURE 17
The Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, 1918.
The Bolshevik dictatorship
Lenin had also promised free elections to the new Constituent Assembly.
Elections were held in late 1917. As Lenin had feared, the Bolsheviks did
not gain a majority. Their rivals, the peasant-based Socialist
Revolutionaries, were the biggest party when the Assembly opened on 18
January 1918. They gained 370 s eats to the Bolsheviks’ 175 a nd 162 s eats
for the other parties.
Lenin solved this problem in his typically direct style. He sent the Red
Guards to close dow n the Assembly. After brief protests (again put dow n by
the Red Guards) the Assembly was forgotten. Lenin instead used the All-
Russia Congress of Soviets to pass his laws as it did contain a Bolshevik
majority.
Russia’s democratic experiment therefore lasted less than 24 h ours, but this
did not trouble Lenin’s conscience. He believed he was establishing a
DICTATORSHIP of the proletariat, which in time would give way to true
COMMUNISM.
Making peace
The next promise that Lenin had to make good w as for peace. He put Trotsky
in charge of negotiating a peace treaty. He told Trotsky to try to spin out the
peace negotiations as long as possible. He hoped that very soon a socialist
revolution would break out in Germany as it had in Russia. By February
1918, h owever, there was no revolution and the Germans began to advance
again. Lenin had to accept their terms in the TREATY OF BREST-LITOVSK in
March 1918.
The Treaty was a severe blow to Russia. You can see how much land was
lost in Figure 17, but this was not the whole story. Russia’s losses included
34 pe r cent of its popu lation, 32 pe r cent of its agricultural land, 54 pe r cent
of its industry, 26 pe r cent of its railways and 89 pe r cent of its coalmines. A
final blow was the imposition of a fine of 300 m illion gold roubles. It was
another example of Lenin’s single-minded leadership. If this much had to be
sacrificed to safeguard his revolution, then so be it. Many Russians,
including revolutionaries, were oppos ed to the signing of the Treaty.
Factfile
Bolshevik decrees, 1917
8 November
•  Land belonging to Tsar, Church and nobles handed over to
peasants.
•  Russia asked for peace with Germany.
12 November
•  Working day limited to eight hours; 48-hour week; rules made
about overtime and holidays.
14 November
•  Workers to be insured against illness or accident.
1 December
•  All non-Bolshevik newspapers banned.
11 December
•  The opposition Constitutional Democratic Party (Kadets) banned;
its leaders arrested.
20 December
•  Cheka (secret police) set up to deal with ‘spies and counter-
revolutionaries’.
27 December
•  Factories put under control of workers’ committees.
•  Banks put under Bolshevik government control.
31 December
•  Marriages could take place without a priest if desired.
•  Divorce made easier.
Think!
Study the Factfile. Which of the Bolshevik decrees would you say
aimed to:
a)  keep the peasants happy
b)  keep the workers happy
c)  increase Bolshevik control
d)  improve personal freedom in Russia?
Revision Tip
•  List two factors which would have generated support for the
Bolsheviks.
•  List two factors which would have created opposition to them.
Opposition and Civil War
Lenin’s activities in 1917–18 w ere bound to make him enemies. He survived
an attempted assassination in August 1918 ( he was hit three times). In
December he set up a secret police force called the Cheka to crush his
oppon ents.
By the end of 1918 a n unlikely collection of anti-Bolshevik elements had
united against the Bolsheviks. They became known as the Whites (in contrast
to the Bolshevik Reds) and consisted of enemies of the Bolsheviks from
inside and outside Russia (see Factfile). By spring 1918 t hree separate White
armies were marching on Bolshevik-controlled western Russia. Generals
Yudenich and Denikin marched towards Petrograd and Moscow, while
Admiral Kolchak marched on Moscow from central southern Russia.
Factfile
The Whites
‘Whites’ was a very broad term and was applied to any anti-
Bolshevik group(s). Whites were made up of:
•  Socialist Revolutionaries
•  Mensheviks
•  supporters of the Tsar
•  landlords and capitalists who had lost land or money in the
revolution
•  the Czech Legion (former prisoners of war).
The Whites were also supported for part of the Civil War by foreign
troops from the USA, Japan, France and Britain. They were sent
by their governments to try to force Russia to rejoin the war
against Germany.
FIGURE 18
The main developments of the Civil War.
FIGURE 19
The Red Terror.
The reaction of the Bolsheviks was ruthless and determined. In an amazingly
short time, Leon Trotsky created a new RED ARMY of over 300,000 m en.
They were led by former tsarist officers. Trotsky made sure of their loyalty
by holding their families hostage and by appointing political commissars to
watch over them. The Cheka (secret police) terrorised the popu lations of
Bolshevik territories so that nobody  co-operated. In July 1918, W hite forces
were approaching Ekaterinburg where the Tsar was being held. The
Bolshevik commander ordered the execution of the Tsar and his family. Lenin
could not risk the Tsar being rescued and returned as leader of the Whites.
The fighting was savage with both sides committing terrible acts of cruelty.
Through harsh discipline and brilliant leadership, Trotsky’s Red Army began
to turn back the White forces. Kolchak’s forces were destroyed towards the
end of 1919 a nd at the same time the foreign ‘armies of intervention’
withdrew. The Whites were not really a strong alliance, and their armies
were unable to work together. Trotsky defeated them one by one. The last
major White army was defeated in the Crimea in November 1920.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain two ways in which the Bolshevik Red
Terror helped them fight the Civil War.
Why did the Bolsheviks win the Civil
War?
The Red Army was no match for the armies that were still fighting on the
Western Front in 1918. However, compared to the Whites, the Red Army was
united and disciplined. It was also brilliantly led by Trotsky.
The Bolsheviks also kept control over their heartlands in western Russia.
•  They made sure that the towns and armies were fed, by  forcing peasants to
hand ove r food a nd by rationing supplies (see Source 22).
•  They took over the factories of Moscow and Petrograd so that they were
able to supply their armies with equipment and ammunition.
•  The Red Terror imposed strict control (see Figure 19 and Source 20).
SOURCE 20
In the villages the peasant will not give grain to the Bolsheviks
because he hates them. Armed companies are sent to take grain
from the peasant and every day, all over Russia, fights for grain
are fought to a finish.
In the Red Army, for any military offence, there is only one
punishment, death. If a regiment retreats against orders, machine
guns are turned on them. The position of the bourgeoisie [middle
class] defies all description. Payments by the banks have been
stopped. It is forbidden to sell furniture. All owners and managers
of works, offices and shops have been called up for compulsory
labour. In Petrograd hundreds of people are dying from hunger.
People are arrested daily and kept in prison for months without
trial.
The Red Terror, observed by a British
businessman in Russia in 1918.
SOURCE 21
Members of the Red Guard requisition grain
from peasants during the Civil War.
SOURCE 22
Having surrounded the village [the Whites] fired a couple of volleys
in the direction of the village and everyone took cover. Then the
mounted soldiers entered the village, met the Bolshevik committee
and put the members to death … After the execution the houses of
the culprits were burned and the male population under forty-five
whipped … Then the population was ordered to deliver without pay
the best cattle, pigs, fowl, forage and bread for the soldiers as well
as the best horses.
Diary of Colonel Drozdovsky, from his
memoirs written in 1923. He was a White
commander during the Civil War.
Source Analysis
1  Use Sources 20 and 21 to describe how the Civil War affected
ordinary people.
2  Do you think Source 21 was painted by opponents or supporters
of the Bolsheviks?
3  Look at Source 24. Who is controlling the White forces?
4  Who do you think Source 23 is talking to?
The Bolsheviks used PROPAGANDA to raise fears about the intentions of the
foreign armies in league with the Whites (Source 24). A propaganda train
spread communist ideas across Russia. Propaganda also raised fears about
the possible return of the Tsar and landlords (Source 23).
Finally, the Reds had important territorial advantages. Their enemies were
spread around the edge of Russia while they controlled the centre and also
the all-important railway system. This enabled them to move troops  and
supplies quickly and effectively by rail, while their enemies used less
efficient methods.
SOURCE 23
For the first time in history the working people have got control of
their country. The workers of all countries are striving to achieve
this objective. We in Russia have succeeded. We have thrown off
the rule of the Tsar, of landlords and of capitalists. But we still have
tremendous difficulties to overcome. We cannot build a new society
in a day. We ask you, are you going to crush us? To help give
Russia back to the landlords, the capitalists and the Tsar?
Red propaganda leaflet, Why Have You
Come to Murmansk?
SOURCE 24
Bolshevik propaganda cartoon, 1919. The
dogs represent the White generals Denikin,
Kolchak and Yudenich.
SOURCE 25
The Civil War, 1918–1920, was a time of great chaos and
estimates of Cheka executions vary from twelve to fifty thousand.
But even the highest figure does not compare to the ferocity of the
White Terror … for instance, in Finland alone, the number of
workers executed by the Whites approaches 100,000.
R. Appignanesi, Lenin for Beginners, 1977.
Source Analysis
‘Most Russians saw the Bolsheviks as the lesser of two evils.’
Explain how Sources 20, 22, 23 and 25 support or challenge this
statement.
The Whites, in contrast with the Bolsheviks, were not united.
•  They were made up of many different groups, all with different aims.
•  They were also widely spread so they were unable to co-ordinate their
campaigns against the Reds. Trotsky was able to defeat them one by one.
•  They had limited support from the Russian popu lation. Russian peasants
did not especially like the Bolsheviks, but they preferred them to the
Whites. If the Whites won, the peasants knew the landlords would return.
Both sides were guilty of atrocities, but the Whites in general caused more
suffering to the peasants than the Reds.
FOCUS TASK 8.9
Why did the Bolsheviks win the Civil War?
1  Draw a table and use the text to make notes about how each of
these factors helped the Bolsheviks win.
    •  Unity
    •  Leadership
    •  Communications, e.g. railways
    •  Geography
    •  Support of the workers
    •  Support of the peasants
    •  The Red Army
    •  Foreign intervention
    •  Propaganda
2  Now write some paragraphs to show how some of these factors
were connected. Two examples are shown below.
Linking Geography and Communications:
In such a vast country communications were a key to success.
The Bolsheviks held the central industrial area which included
all the main railway lines out of Moscow and Petrograd. This
meant that they could get soldiers and military supplies to the
different fronts much more easily that the Whites who found it
very difficult to communicate with each other and move troops
around the edges of the centre.
Linking Foreign intervention and Propaganda:
The foreign intervention was a gift to the Reds. They could use
it in their propaganda to show that the Red Army was fighting
foreign invaders.
Revision Tip
•  List two weaknesses of the Whites.
•  List two strengths of the Bolsheviks.
•  Decide for yourself whether White weaknesses or Bolshevik
strengths were more important.
Economic policy
War Communism
WAR COMMUNISM was the name given to the harsh economic measures the
Bolsheviks adopted during the Civil War in order to survive. It had two main
aims. The first aim was to put communist theories into practice by
redistributing (sharing out) wealth among the Russian people. The second
aim was to help with the Civil War by keeping the towns and the Red Army
supplied with food a nd weapons.
•  All large factories were taken over by the Government.
•  Production was planned and organised by the Government.
•  Discipline for workers was strict and strikers could be shot.
•  Peasants had to hand ove r surplus food t o the Government. If they didn’t,
they could be shot.
•  Food w as rationed.
•  Free enterprise became illegal – all production and trade was controlled
by the state.
SOURCE 26
Starving children photographed during the
Russian famine of 1921.
Source Analysis
Why do you think the photograph in Source 26 was taken and
published in 1921? Use the source and your knowledge to explain
your answer.
War Communism achieved its aim of winning the war, but in doing so it
caused terrible hardship. Peasants refused to co-operate in producing more
food be cause the Government simply took it away. This led to food s hortages
which, along with the bad weather in 1920 a nd 1921, c aused a terrible
famine. Some estimates suggest that 7 million Russian people died in this
famine. There were even reports of cannibalism.
Kronstadt mutiny
As you saw on page 193 the sailors from the Kronstadt naval base were
strong supporters of the Bolsheviks during the revolution and the Civil War.
However, they were concerned at the impact that Bolshevik policies were
having on ordinary Russians. Sailors from two of the battleships at Kronstadt
passed a resolution calling on the Bolsheviks to change their policies. They
made fifteen demands, including new elections, FREEDOM OF SPEECH, equal
rations and the scrapping of the militia units which were taking peasants’
grain.
This was a potentially serious threat to Lenin and the Bolsheviks. Lenin
issued a statement claiming the rebellion was a plot by the White force. He
demanded the rebels surrender. They refused, so in early March Trotsky’s
forces stormed the Kronstadt base. There was heavy fighting and although
there are no reliable figures about casualties the death toll was probably in
the thousands. Thousands more of the rebels were executed or imprisoned in
labour camps. Nevertheless, the rebellion had affected Lenin. Because the
Kronstadt sailors had been among the strongest supporters of Lenin and
Bolshevism in 1917–20, L enin began to think that he had to make some
concessions.
Think!
Why do you think Lenin was more worried about the revolt of the
sailors than about starvation among the peasants?
The New Economic Policy
In March 1921, a t the Party Congress, Lenin announced some startling new
policies which he called the NEW ECONOMIC POLICY (NEP). The NEP
effectively brought back capitalism for some sections of Russian society.
Peasants were allowed to sell surplus grain for profit and would pay tax on
what they produced rather than giving some of it up to the Government.
SOURCE 27
Our poverty and ruin are so great that we cannot at one stroke
restore large-scale socialist production … we must try to satisfy the
demands of the peasants who are dissatisfied, discontented and
cannot be otherwise … there must be a certain amount of freedom
to trade, freedom for the small private owner. We are now
retreating, but we are doing this so as to then run and leap forward
more vigorously.
Lenin, introducing the NEP at the Party
Congress, 1921.
FIGURE 28
How the NEP differed from War Communism.
In the towns, small factories were handed back into private ownership and
private trading of small goods  was allowed.
Lenin made it clear that the NEP was temporary and that the vital heavy
industries (coal, oil, iron and steel) would remain in state hands.
Nevertheless, many Bolsheviks were horrified when the NEP was
announced, seeing it as a betrayal of communism. As always, Lenin won the
argument and the NEP went into ope ration from 1921 on wards. By 1925
there seemed to be strong evidence that it was working, as food pr oduction in
particular rose steeply. However, increases in production did not necessarily
improve the situation of industrial workers.
SOURCE 29
Poor, starving old Russia, Russia of primitive lighting and the meal
of a crust of black bread, is going to be covered by a network of
electric power stations. The NEP will transform the Russian
economy and rebuild a broken nation. The future is endless and
beautiful.
Bukharin, speaking in 1922. He was a leading
Bolshevik and a strong supporter of the NEP.
FIGURE 30
Production under the New Economic Policy,
1921–25.
Source Analysis
Does the evidence of Figure 30 prove that the NEP was a success?
Explain your answer with reference to Sources 27 and 29.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can explain the aims of War Communism.
•  List two effects of War Communism.
•  List two key features of the NEP.
The death of Lenin and the creation of
the USSR
Lenin did not live to see the recovery of the Russian economy. He suffered
several strokes in 1922 a nd 1923 w hich left him paralysed and which led to
his death in January 1924. He was a remarkable man by any standards. He
led Russia through revolution and civil war and even in 1923 h e supervised
the drawing up of a new Constitution that turned the Russian Empire into the
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics. Source 31 gives the opinion of a British
historian.
We will never know what policies Lenin would have pursued if he had lived
longer – he certainly left no clear plans about how long he wanted the NEP to
last. He also left another big unanswered question behind him: who was to
be the next leader of the USSR?
SOURCE 31
Lenin did more than any other political leader to change the face of
the twentieth-century world. The creation of Soviet Russia and its
survival were due to him. He was a very great man and even,
despite his faults, a very good man.
The British historian A.J.P. Taylor writing in
the 1960s.
SOURCE 32
In the late 1980s and 1990s, Soviet archives were opened up as
the Communist regime came to an end. These revealed a much
harder, more ruthless Lenin than the ‘softer’ image he had enjoyed
amongst left-wing historians and groups. For instance, a
memorandum, first published in 1990, reveals his ordering the
extermination of the clergy in a place called Shuya …
Lenin believed that revolutionaries had to be hard to carry out their
role, which would inevitably involve spilling the blood of their
opponents. Although hard and tough on others, it seems that Lenin
was not personally brave. He left the fighting to others.
An extract from Communist Russia under
Lenin and Stalin. This was an A-level History
textbook published in 2002.
Source Analysis
From all you have found out about Lenin, do you agree with Source
32? (Don’t forget to look at Source 31.)
Key Question Summary
How did the Bolsheviks gain power and how did they hold on
to power?
  1  After the Tsar’s abdication, a Provisional Government was set
up to run Russia until elections could be held to choose a new
government.
  2  The Petrograd Soviet had the real power in the capital because
it controlled the army and the workers in the factories.
  3  The Provisional Government was weak and failed to deal with
the problems of the war and the land to the satisfaction of the
people. The economic situation continued to deteriorate
throughout 1917.
  4  Lenin returned to Russia and announced, in the April Theses,
that his party, the Bolsheviks, would end the war, give the land
to the peasants and ensure that the people got food. This
brought them popular support although an attempt by some
Bolsheviks to stage a rising in the July Days was a failure.
  5  However, after Kornilov’s attempted coup, they had enough
support to take control of the Petrograd Soviet. On Lenin’s
urging, they seized power in October 1917.
  6  The Bolsheviks dealt with any internal opposition ruthlessly by
using the Cheka.
  7  Lenin ended the war by the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk.
  8  He crushed the newly elected Constituent Assembly because
the Bolsheviks did not win the elections.
  9  The Bolsheviks won the Civil War and kept the economy going
through a system called War Communism. War Communism
worked but it was very harsh and it started to turn former
supporters against the Communists (including the Kronstadt
sailors).
10  Lenin introduced a compromise – the New Economic Policy –
which allowed the economy to recover and bring the people
respite and some prosperity. By 1924 the Bolsheviks were
firmly in power and had CONSOLIDATED their position.
FOCUS TASK 8.10
How did the Bolsheviks consolidate their rule?
1  Draw a timeline from 1917 to 1924, and mark on it the events of
that period mentioned in the text.
2  Mark on the timeline:
    a)  one moment at which you think Bolshevik rule was most
threatened
    b)  one moment at which you think it was most secure.
3  Write an explanation of how the Bolsheviks made their rule more
secure. Mention the following:
    •  the power of the Red Army
    •  treatment of opposition
    •  War Communism
    •  the New Economic Policy
    •  the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk
    •  the victory in the Civil War
    •  the promise of a new society
    •  propaganda.
4  Is any one of these factors more important than any of the
others? Explain your answer.
8C Stalin’s Russia
FOCUS
Most people thought Trotsky was the person most likely to succeed
Lenin. Yet not only did Stalin become the new leader of the USSR,
but over the next 40 years he changed it radically. He created a
modern industrial state that became a superpower but he also
created a TOTALITARIAN state where opposition was not tolerated and
where the government imprisoned or murdered millions of its own
citizens.
How did Stalin gain and hold on to power?
Focus Points
•  Why did Stalin, and not Trotsky, emerge as Lenin’s successor?
•  Why did Stalin launch the Purges?
•  What methods did Stalin use to control the Soviet Union?
•  How complete was Stalin’s control over the Soviet Union by
1941?
What was the impact of Stalin’s economic policies?
Focus Points
•  Why did Stalin introduce the Five-Year Plans?
•  Why did Stalin introduce collectivisation?
•  How successful were Stalin’s economic changes?
•  How were the Soviet people affected by these changes?
In this section you will look at two overlapping themes: how Stalin
modernised the USSR and how he controlled it.
SOURCE 1
An official poster from the mid to late 1930s
showing Stalin pointing out the achievements
of the USSR and its people.
Source Analysis
1  Study Source 1. What achievements is Stalin pointing out?
2  Which figure can you see top left? Why do you think he has been
placed in this position?
3  Why do you think this poster was produced at the end of the
1930s?
Stalin or Trotsky?
When Lenin died in 1924 t here were several leading Communists who were
possible candidates to take his place. Among the contenders were Kamenev
and Zinoviev, leading Bolsheviks who had played important parts in the
Bolshevik Revolution of 1917, a nd Bukharin, a more moderate member of
the party who favoured the NEP and wanted to introduce communism
gradually to the USSR. However, the real struggle to succeed Lenin was
between two bitter rivals, Joseph Stalin and Leon Trotsky. The pow er
struggle went on for some time and it was not until 1929 t hat Stalin made
himself completely secure as the supreme leader of the USSR. Stalin
achieved this through a combination of political scheming, the mistakes of his
oppon ents and the clever way in which he built up his pow er base in the
Communist Party.
Lenin’s Testament
Source 2 shows Lenin’s opinions of Trotsky and Stalin. As Lenin lay dying in
late 1923 T rotsky seemed most likely to win. He was a brilliant speaker and
writer, as well as the party’s best political thinker, after Lenin. He was also
the man who had organised the Bolshevik Revolution and was the hero of the
Civil War as leader of the Red Army (see page 216).
SOURCE 2
Comrade Stalin, having become Secretary General, has unlimited
authority in his hands and I am not sure whether he will always be
capable of using that authority with sufficient caution.
Comrade Trotsky, on the other hand, is distinguished not only by
his outstanding ability. He is personally probably the most capable
man in the present Central Committee, but he has displayed
excessive self-assurance and preoccupation with the purely
administrative side of the work.
Lenin’s Testament. This is often used as
evidence that Stalin was an outsider.
However, the document contained many
remarks critical of other leading Communists
as well. It was never published in Russia,
although, if it had been, it would certainly
have damaged Stalin.
Factfile
Stalin’s steps to power
•  1923 Lenin calls for Stalin to be replaced. Trotsky calls him ‘the
party’s most eminent mediocrity’.
•  1924 Lenin’s death. Stalin attends funeral as chief mourner.
Trotsky does not turn up (tricked by Stalin).
•  1924 Stalin, Kamenev and Zinoviev form the triumvirate that
dominates the Politburo, the policy-making committee of the
Communist Party. Working together, these three cut off their
opponents (Trotsky and Bukharin) because between them they
control the important posts in the party.
•  1925 Trotsky sacked as War Commissar. Stalin introduces his
idea of Socialism in One Country.
•  1926 Stalin turns against Kamenev and Zinoviev and allies
himself with Bukharin.
•  1927 Kamenev, Zinoviev and Trotsky all expelled from the
Communist Party.
•  1928 Trotsky exiled to Siberia. Stalin begins attacking Bukharin.
•  1929 Trotsky expelled from USSR and Bukharin expelled from
the Communist Party.
Trotsky’s mistakes
So how did Trotsky lose this contest? Much of the blame lies with Trotsky
himself. He was brilliant, but also arrogant and high-handed. He often
offended other senior party members. More importantly, he failed to take the
oppos ition seriously. He made little effort to build up any support in the
ranks of the party. And he seriously underestimated Stalin, as did the other
contenders. No one saw Stalin as a threat. They were all more concerned
with each other. Stalin kept in the shadows, not taking a clear position and
seeming to be the friend and ally of different groups. This allowed him to
become steadily more pow erful without the others realising it.
Trotsky also frightened many people in the USSR. They were worried he
might become a DICTATOR, especially because he had a great deal of support
in the army. Trotsky argued that the future security of the USSR lay in trying
to spread permanent revolution across the globe until the whole world was
communist. Many people were worried that Trotsky would involve the USSR
in new conflicts and that his radical policies might split the party.
SOURCE 3
Trotsky refrained from attacking Stalin because he felt secure. No
contemporary, and he least of all, saw in the Stalin of 1923 the
menacing and towering figure he was to become. It seemed to
Trotsky almost a joke that Stalin, the wilful and sly but shabby and
inarticulate man in the background, should be his rival.
Historian I. Deutscher in The Prophet
Unarmed, Trotsky 1921–1929, published in
1959.
Luck
As it often does in history, chance also played a part. Trotsky was unfortunate
in falling ill late in 1923 w ith a malaria-like infection – just when Lenin was
dying, and Trotsky needed to be at his most active.
Stalin’s cunning
We have already seen that Stalin was a clever politician and he planned his
bid for pow er carefully. He made great efforts to associate himself with
Lenin wherever possible and got off to an excellent start at Lenin’s funeral.
He played a trick on Trotsky. Stalin cabled Trotsky to tell him that Lenin’s
funeral was to be on 26 J anuary, when it was in fact going to be on the 27th.
Trotsky was away in the south of Russia and would not have had time to get
back for the 26th, although he could have got back for the 27th. As a result,
Trotsky did not appear at the funeral whereas Stalin appeared as chief
mourner and Lenin’s closest comrade and follower.
SOURCE 4
Lenin and Stalin. Stalin made the most of any
opportunity to appear close to Lenin. This
photograph is a suspected fake.
He was also extremely clever in using his pow er within the Communist
Party. He took on many boring but important jobs including the post of
General Secretary. He used these positions to put his own supporters into
important posts and remove people likely to support his oppon ents from the
Party. He was also very good a t political manoeuvring. First of all he allied
himself with Zinoviev and Kamanev to push out Trotsky. Then he allied
himself with Bukharin in the debate about the NEP (see page 219) to defeat
Zinoviev and Kamanev and later get them, along with Trotsky, expelled from
the Party. All the time he was building his own pow er base, bringing in his
supporters to the Party Congress and Central Committee to make sure he was
chosen as leader. Finally, he turned on Bukharin and his supporters, removing
them from pow erful positions. By 1929 h e was the unchallenged leader.
Stalin’s policies also met with greater favour than Trotsky’s. Stalin propos ed
that in future the party should try to establish ‘Socialism in One Country’
rather than try to spread revolution worldwide. The idea that they could
achieve SOCIALISM on their own appealed to the Russian sense of
NATIONALISM. Finally, Stalin appeared to be a straightforward Georgian
peasant – much more a man of the people than his intellectual rivals. To a
Soviet people weary of years of war and revolution, Stalin seemed to be the
man who understood t heir feelings.
Profile
Joseph Stalin
•  Born 1879 in Georgia. His father was a shoemaker and an
alcoholic.
•  Original name was Iosif Dzhugashvili but changed his name to
Stalin (man of steel).
•  Twice exiled to Siberia by the tsarist secret police, he escaped
each time.
•  Made his name in violent bank raids to raise party funds.
•  He was slow and steady, but very hardworking.
•  He also held grudges and generally made his enemies suffer.
•  Became a leading communist after playing an important role in
defending the Bolshevik city of Tsaritsyn (later Stalingrad) during
the Civil War.
•  Had become undisputed party leader by 1929.
Think!
In groups, look at the following statements and decide on a scale
of 1–5 how far you agree with them.
•  Stalin was a dull and unimaginative politician.
•  Stalin appeared to be a dull and unimaginative politician.
•  Trotsky lost the contest because of his mistakes.
•  Stalin trusted to luck rather than careful planning.
•  Stalin was ruthless and devious.
Try to find evidence on these two pages to back up your
judgements.
FOCUS TASK 8.11
Why did Stalin and not Trotsky emerge as Lenin’s successor?
Write notes under the following headings to explain why Stalin
rather than Trotsky emerged as the new leader of Russia.
•  Trotsky’s strengths and weaknesses in the leadership contest
•  Why other contenders underestimated Stalin
•  How Stalin outmanoeuvred other contenders
•  Why Stalin’s policies were attractive to Party members
Then combine your notes to write your own account in answer to
the question: ‘Why did Stalin and not Trotsky emerge as Lenin’s
successor?’
Revision Tip
•  List two mistakes made by Trotsky.
•  List two strengths or clever actions of Stalin.
Modernising the USSR: 1 –
Industrialisation
SOURCE 5
Throughout history Russia has been beaten again and again
because she was backward … All have beaten her because of her
military, industrial and agricultural backwardness. She was beaten
because people have been able to get away with it. If you are
backward and weak, then you are in the wrong and may be beaten
and enslaved. But if you are powerful, people must beware of you.
It is sometimes asked whether it is not possible to slow down
industrialisation a bit. No, comrades, it is not possible … To
slacken would mean falling behind. And those who fall behind get
beaten … That is why Lenin said during the October Revolution:
‘Either perish, or overtake and outstrip the advanced capitalist
countries.’ We are 50 to 100 years behind the advanced countries.
Either we make good the difference in ten years or they crush us.
Stalin speaking in 1931.
Think!
Look at the different reasons Stalin had for wanting to modernise
the USSR. Which do you think he would have placed as his top
priority?
Why did Stalin want to modernise Soviet
industry?
Why did Stalin want to modernise Soviet agriculture?
Security
It might seem clear from Source 5 why Stalin wanted to give the
USSR a modern industrial economy. Security was certainly a key
factor. The First World War had shown that a country could only
fight a modern war if it had the industries to produce the weapons
and other equipment which were needed – it was impossible to
equip an army with rifles and uniforms without the factories to
make them. And those factories needed iron, steel, textiles and
other resources to turn into rifles and uniforms. And without coal
and electricity to power them there would not be any factories
anyway. It is also worth noting that Stalin planned for many of the
new industrial projects to be further east in the USSR, potentially
safer from invasion.
Socialism in One Country
This was closely connected to his policy of ‘Socialism in One
Country’. This policy had a lot of support in the Communist Party
and in the USSR generally. Stalin saw an opportunity to harness
nationalist pride to develop the economy. When Stalin took power,
much of Russia’s industrial equipment had to be imported. Stalin
wanted to make the USSR self-sufficient so that it could make
everything it needed for itself. He wanted the USSR to compete on
equal terms with the economies of the West. He hoped to see a
time when the West would be importing goods from the USSR not
the other way around. He also wanted to improve standards of
living in Russia with better housing, mass education and health care
so that people would value communist rule.
Power and control
But this was not the only reason. As you have already seen, Stalin
was a cunning political operator who made alliances with different
groups in order to dispose of his rivals. By 1928 he had allied
himself to Bukharin and his supporters, who believed in the NEP. In
order to undermine Bukharin he switched his position and became
a supporter of greater state planning and control and the
construction of large projects like railways and hydro-electric dams.
Once he removed Bukharin and other opponents the
industrialisation programme also became a powerful means of
controlling the country. Many political prisoners were sent to work
in appalling conditions in labour camps’ building projects like the
White Sea to Baltic Canal. The fate of these prisoners often
discouraged others. Similarly, anyone who complained or criticised
Stalin’s programme could be accused of undermining the country’s
progress.
Ideology
Stalin also had ideological reasons. Communist theory said that
most people had to be workers for communism to work. In 1928
only about one in five Russians were industrial workers. So Stalin
was trying to build a power base of industrial workers who he
hoped would benefit from industrialisation and so support him.
Personal reputation
Finally, Stalin probably saw modernising industry as a means of
establishing his own personal reputation. Lenin had made big
changes to the USSR. Stalin wanted to prove himself as a great
leader by bringing about even greater changes. He would be able
to point to dams, factories, railways and electricity pylons and take
the credit for these achievements, helped by a formidable
propaganda machine of films, posters, painting and music.
The Five-Year Plans
Stalin ended Lenin’s NEP and set about achieving modernisation through a
series of FIVE-YEAR PLANS. These plans were drawn up by GOSPLAN, the
state planning organisation that Lenin had set up in 1921. It set ambitious
targets for production in the vital heavy industries (coal, iron, oil,
electricity). The plans were very complex but they were set out in such a way
that by 1929 e very worker knew what he or she had to achieve.
GOSPLAN set overall targets for an industry.
Each region was told its targets.
The region set targets for each mine, factory, etc.
The manager of each mine, factory, etc. set targets for each
foreman.
The foremen set targets for each shift and even for individual
workers.
The first Five-Year Plan(1982–32)  focused on the major industries and
although most targets were not met, the achievements were still staggering.
The USSR increased production and created a foundation on which to build
the next Five-Year Plans. The USSR was rich in natural resources, but many
of them were in remote places such as Siberia. So whole cities were built
from nothing and workers taken out to the new industrial centres. Foreign
observers marvelled as huge new steel mills appeared at Magnitogorsk in the
Urals and Sverdlovsk in central Siberia. New dams and hydro-electric
power fed industry’s energy requirements. Russian ‘experts’ floode d into the
Muslim REPUBLICS of central Asia such as Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan,
creating industry from scratch in previously undeveloped areas.
FIGURE 6
Locations of the new industrial centres.
The second Five-Year Plan (1933–37)  built on the achievements of the first.
Heavy industry was still a priority, but other areas were also developed.
Mining for lead, tin, zinc and other minerals intensified as Stalin further
exploited Siberia’s rich mineral resources. Transport and communications
were also boos ted, and new railways and canals were built. The most
spectacular showpiece project was the Moscow underground railway.
Stalin also wanted industrialisation to help improve Russia’s agriculture.
The production of tractors and other farm machinery increased dramatically.
In the third Five-Year Plan, which was begun in 1938, s ome factories were
to switch to the production of consumer goods . However, this plan was
disrupted by the Second World War.
FOCUS TASK 8.12
Why did Stalin introduce the Five-Year Plans?
Study the reasons set out on page 224 as well as Source 5. Now
draw your own version of this diagram with much larger bubbles.
•  In the speech bubbles summarise the reasons for his plans Stalin
would have set out to a public audience.
•  In the thought bubbles summarise the other reasons which you
think Stalin might have kept to himself.
Revision Tip
You need to be able to explain at least two reasons why Stalin
introduced the Five-Year Plans. Make sure you can explain rather
than just describe what he did.
The impact of industrialisation on Russian
people
The impact of industrialisation on Russian people
Targets, hard work and propaganda
Any programme as extreme as Stalin’s Five-Year Plans was bound
to carry a cost. In the USSR this cost was paid by the workers.
Many foreign experts and engineers were called in by Stalin to
supervise the work and in their letters and reports they marvel at
the toughness of the Russian people.
The workers were constantly bombarded with propaganda,
posters, slogans and radio broadcasts. They all had strict targets
to meet and were fined if they did not meet them.
The most famous worker was Alexei Stakhanov. In 1935, with two
helpers and an easy coal seam to work on, he managed to cut an
amazing 102 tons of coal in one shift. This was fourteen times the
average for a shift. Stakhanov became a ‘Hero of Socialist Labour’
and the propaganda machine encouraged all Soviet workers to be
STAKHANOVITES.
Women workers
The first Five-Year Plan revealed a shortage of workers, so from
1930 the Government concentrated on drafting more women into
industry. It set up thousands of new crèches and day-care centres
so that mothers could work. By 1937 women were 40 per cent of
industrial workers (compared to 28 per cent in 1927), 21 per cent
of building workers and 72 per cent of health workers. Four out of
five new workers recruited between 1932 and 1937 were women.
Training
By the late 1930s many Soviet workers had improved their
conditions by acquiring well-paid skilled jobs and earning bonuses
for meeting targets. Unemployment was almost non-existent. In
1940 the USSR had more doctors per head of population than
Britain. Education became free and compulsory for all and Stalin
invested huge sums in training schemes based in colleges and in
the workplace.
Slave labour
On the great engineering projects, such as dams and canals, many
of the workers were prisoners who had been sentenced to hard
labour for being political opponents, or suspected opponents, of
Stalin, or for being kulaks (rich peasants) or Jews. Many other
prisoners were simply unfortunate workers who had had accidents
or made mistakes in their work but had been found guilty of
‘sabotage’.
On these major projects conditions were appalling and there were
many deaths and accidents. It is estimated that 100,000 workers
died in the construction of the Belomor Canal.
Wages and living conditions
In the towns and cities, most housing was provided by the state,
but overcrowding was a problem. Most families lived in flats and
were crowded into two rooms, which were used for living, sleeping
and eating. What’s more, wages actually fell between 1928 and
1937. In 1932 a husband and wife who both worked earned only as
much as one man or woman had in 1928.
At the same time, the concentration on heavy industry meant that
there were few consumer goods (such as clothes or radios) that
ordinary people wanted to buy.
Control
To escape punishments and harsh conditions, or to try to get better
wages and bonuses, workers moved jobs frequently (in some
industries three times a year). This did not help industry or society
to stabilise. To try to prevent this, internal passports were
introduced to prevent the movement of workers inside the USSR.
Repression
Stalin was also quite prepared to destroy the way of life of the
Soviet people to help industrialisation. For example, in the republics
of central Asia the influence of Islam was thought to hold back
industrialisation, so between 1928 and 1932 it was repressed.
Many Muslim leaders were imprisoned or deported, mosques were
closed and pilgrimages to Mecca were forbidden.
Punishments and blame
On the other hand, life was very harsh under Stalin. Factory
discipline was strict and punishments were severe. Lateness or
absences were punished by sacking, and that often meant losing
your flat or house as well. In the headlong rush to fulfil targets,
many of the products were of poor quality. Some factories over-
produced in massive amounts while others had to shut down for
short periods because they could not get parts and raw materials.
However, things did improve under the second and third Five-Year
Plans.
Blaming the workers was a good way of excusing mistakes made
by management, although many workers were unskilled ex-
peasants and did sometimes cause damage to machinery and
equipment.
SOURCE 7
We got so dirty and we were such young things, small, slender,
fragile. But we had our orders to build the metro and we wanted to
do it more than anything else. We wore our miners’ overalls with
such style. My feet were size four and the boots were elevens. But
there was such enthusiasm.
Tatyana Fyodorova, interviewed as an old
lady in 1990, remembers building the
Moscow Metro.
SOURCE 8
Half a billion cubic feet of excavation work … 25,000 tons of
structural steel … without sufficient labour, without necessary
quantities of the most rudimentary materials. Brigades of young
enthusiasts arrived in the summer of 1930 and did the groundwork
of railroad and dam … Later groups of peasants came … Many
were completely unfamiliar with industrial tools and processes…
J. Scott, Behind the Urals, 1943.
Achievements of the Five-Year Plans
There is much that could be and was criticised in the Five-Year Plans. For
example:
•  There was much inefficiency, duplication of effort and waste.
•  There was also an immense human cost. One feature of the plans was
spectacular building projects, such as the Dnieprostroi Dam, which were
used as a showcase of Soviet achievement. The Moscow Metro was
particularly impressive with vast stations and stunning architectural
design. But many thousands of workers were killed in making them.
However, the fact remains that by 1937 t he USSR was a modern, industrial
state and it was this that saved it from defeat when Hitler invaded in 1941.
Figure 9 shows how production increased.
Think!
Draw a diagram of a see-saw. List the benefits of industrialisation
on one side and the downsides on the other. Finally, decide which
way the see-saw will tip for the Russian people.
FIGURE 9
The achievements of the Five-Year Plans.
Behind the propaganda
The Five-Year Plans were used very effectively for propaganda purposes
(see Source 11). Stalin had wanted the Soviet Union to be a beacon of
socialism and his publicity machine used the successes of industrialisation to
further that objective. But the sources need careful evaluation.
FIGURE 10
The growth in the output of the USSR, 1913–
40.
FIGURE 11
Soviet propaganda poster, 1933. In the top
half, the hand is holding the first Five-Year
Plan. The capitalist is saying (in 1928),
‘Fantasy, Lies, Utopia.’ The bottom half
shows 1933.
FIGURE 12
Graph showing share of world manufacturing
output, 1929–38.
Source Analysis
1  What is the message of Source 11?
2  How could Stalin use Figures 10 and 12 to support the claims of
Source 11?
FOCUS TASK 8.13
How successful were Stalin’s economic policies? 1: The Five-
Year Plans
Use all the information and sources in this section to assess the
Five-Year Plans for industry. Copy and complete a table like the
one below. Fill out column 2. You will come back to column 3 on
page 231.
 The Five-Year Plans Collectivisation
Policy   
Aims   
Key features   
Successes   
Failures   
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can list at least two successes of the Five-Year
Plans and explain why they were successes.
•  Make sure you can list at least two failures of the Five-Year
Plans and explain why they were failures.
Modernising the USSR: 2 –
Collectivisation
Why did Stalin want to modernise Soviet
agriculture?
Why did Stalin want to modernise Soviet agriculture?
Feeding the workers
For the enormous changes of the Five-Year Plans to be successful,
Stalin needed to modernise the USSR’s agriculture as well.
Agriculture was the biggest single resource the USSR had. The
vast majority of Russians worked in agriculture and he wanted to
make the fullest use of this resource.
Stalin’s industrialisation programme had created a huge army of
workers, many living in newly built towns, who were working in
industry and not producing food. They needed to be fed and yet as
early as 1928 the country was already 2 million tons short of the
grain it needed to feed its workers. The USSR was actually
importing food. This was bad from an economic point of view. It
was also humiliating from a political view that a country with such
huge agricultural resources could not feed its own people.
Food exports
Stalin also wanted to try to raise money for his industrialisation
programme by selling exports of surplus food abroad. He could
only do this if he could fully exploit the USSR’s agricultural
resources and massively increase food production. If he could do
this he could develop industry further and improve living standards
for workers.
Building his reputation
Stalin probably thought that modernising agriculture would also
enhance his reputation in the same way that the Five-Year Plans
for industry would. The full propaganda machine of the USSR was
MOBILISED. It praised the modernisation of agriculture and
celebrated the arrival of new techniques and machinery, especially
tractors. It also relentlessly attacked those who opposed him.
Ending the NEP
The NEP had proved popular with the peasants, especially the
more prosperous peasants known as kulaks. Kulaks usually owned
more and better land than the average peasant which meant they
could grow more food and sell the surplus food for profit. Small
merchants also benefited from the NEP. They bought the surplus
food from the peasants and kulaks and sold it in the towns and
cities for a profit. These merchants were often called NEPmen.
Stalin had built a lot of support within the Communist Party with his
ideas about Socialism in One Country. He had also undermined
Bukharin by opposing the NEP. It was unacceptable to Stalin to
have the countryside operating the old NEP.
Stalin also knew that the kulaks and NEPmen would never support
him. He thought that by removing them he could replace them with
peasants who would gain from his new agricultural policies and
would therefore be more loyal to him. The struggle between Stalin
and the kulaks and other peasants who opposed him would turn out
to be bitter and incredibly destructive.
SOURCE 13
A map of the USSR from a Soviet children’s
book. It was explaining how agriculture was
being reorganised in the USSR.
FOCUS TASK 8.14
Why did Stalin introduce collectivisation?
On page 224 you saw that Stalin wanted to modernise industry for
the following reasons:
•  security
•  power and control
•  ideology
•  Socialism in One Country
•  personal reputation.
1  How many of these apply to his reasons for modernising
agriculture? Explain your answers with examples.
2  Are there any extra reasons or factors in addition to the list
above which explain why Stalin wanted to modernise
agriculture?
Revision Tip
Make sure you can explain at least two aims of collectivisation.
The impact of collectivisation on Russian
people
The plan
It would not be easy to modernise the USSR’s agriculture. Stalin’s method
was collectivisation – forcing the farmers to combine their lands and cattle
and farm them together (collectively) – see Factfile.
Most peasants were still working on small plots of land using age-old
methods. Making the peasants work on larger farms meant that:
•  It would be easier to make efficient use of tractors, fertilisers and other
modern methods of farming. This would produce more food.
•  Mechanised farming would require fewer workers and release large
numbers of peasants to work in growing industries.
•  It would be easier to collect grain and taxes from larger farms.
•  It would also be a more socialist way of farming as farmers would co-
operate rather than selling their own food f or a profit.
Factfile
Collectivisation
•  Peasants were to put their lands together to form large joint
farms (‘KOLKHOZ’) but could keep small plots for personal use.
•  Animals and tools were to be shared.
•  Motor tractors were provided by government.
•  Ninety per cent of produce would be sold to the state and the
profits shared.
•  The remaining 10 per cent of produce was to feed the ‘kolkhoz’.
Resistance
There was one big problem with collectivisation. The peasants did not want
to hand ove r their animals and tools and be ordered around by farm
managers. All they wanted was to farm their own piece of land without
interference from the Government. This applied particularly to kulaks –
richer peasants who ow ned larger farms and employed agricultural
labourers.
The Government sent out activists, backed up by the secret police, to
‘persuade’ them. A massive propaganda campaign was organised to inform
peasants of the advantages of joining a collective farm. Some did join, but
many resisted bitterly. They preferred to slaughter and eat their animals
rather than allow them to be taken. They burnt crops and even their houses. In
some areas there was armed resistance.
Deportation
The Government blamed the kulaks for all the trouble and Stalin announced
that ‘We must liquidate the kulaks as a class’. In practice, anybody  who
resisted became a kulak. Peasants were rounded up and deported in huge
numbers to remote areas in Siberia, or to labour camps. Others fled to the
cities.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can list at least two successes of collectivisation
and explain why they were successes.
•  Make sure you can list at least two failures of collectivisation and
explain why they were failures.
Famine
This process in 1930–32 c aused huge disruption in the countryside and there
were severe food s hortages. This, combined with a poor  harvest in 1932, l ed
to a famine on an unimaginable scale, particularly in Ukraine, in the years
1932–33. The Government would not acknowledge the famine and still sent
out requisitioning gangs to collect grain for the workers and to export to other
countries. Millions starved, pe rhaps as many as 13 m illion people. It was a
man-made human tragedy of immense proportions. The way of life of
millions of peasants had been destroyed.
Impact
Despite the famine, Stalin did not ease off. By 1934 t here were no kulaks
left. By 1941 a lmost all agricultural land was organised under the collective
system. Stalin had achieved his aim of collectivisation.
After this traumatic period, the countryside did settle dow n and gradually
more grain was produced, although the numbers of animals did not reach pre-
collectivisation levels until 1940. Stalin had achieved his aim: he had
established control of the grain supply and collectivised the peasants.
Moreover, he had a ready supply of labour for the factories.
SOURCE 14
In order to turn a peasant society into an industrialised country,
countless material and human sacrifices were necessary. The
people had to accept this, but it would not be achieved by
enthusiasm alone … If a few million people had to perish in the
process, history would forgive Comrade Stalin … The great aim
demanded great energy that could be drawn from a backward
people only by great harshness.
Anatoli Rybakov, Children of the Arbat, 1988.
FOCUS TASK 8.15
How successful were Stalin’s economic policies? 2:
Collectivisation
1  You started a chart on page 228. Now complete column 3 to
assess the policy of collectivisation.
2  Which policy do you think was more effective: the Five-Year
Plans or collectivisation? Support your answer with evidence
from pages 225–231.
SOURCE 15
‘How are things with you?’ I asked one old man. He looked around
anxiously to see that no soldiers were about. ‘We have nothing,
absolutely nothing. They have taken everything away.’ It was true.
The famine is an organised one. Some of the food that has been
taken away from them is being exported to foreign countries. It is
literally true that whole villages have been exiled. I saw myself a
group of some twenty peasants being marched off under escort.
This is so common a sight that it no longer arouses even curiosity.
The Manchester Guardian, 1933.
Source Analysis
Read Source 15. Why do you think the only reports of the famine
came from Western journalists?
FOCUS TASK 8.16
How were Soviet people affected by Stalin’s economic
policies?
Through pages 224–231 you have studied why and how Stalin tried
to modernise Soviet industry and agriculture. In this task we want
you to weigh up the overall effects on the Soviet people who both
made the changes possible yet also suffered from them. From the
text and sources on pages 226–231 compile evidence in a table
like this:
Evidence that Stalin’s
economic policies made life
betterEvidence that Stalin’s
economic policies made life
worse
  
Try to find at least two pieces of evidence on each side and make
sure you can explain why it could be used as evidence for each
argument.
SOURCE 16
Stalin, ignoring the great cost in human life and misery, claimed
that collectivisation was a success; for, after the great famines
caused at the time … no more famines came to haunt the Russian
people. The collective farms, despite their inefficiencies, did grow
more food than the tiny, privately owned holdings had done. For
example, 30 to 40 million tons of grain were produced every year.
Collectivisation also meant the introduction of machines into the
countryside. Now 2 million previously backward peasants learned
how to drive a tractor. New methods of farming were taught by
agricultural experts. The countryside was transformed.
Historian E. Roberts, Stalin, Man of Steel,
published in 1986.
Key Question Summary
What was the impact of Stalin’s economic policies?
  1  From 1928, Stalin embarked on a radical programme of change
to modernise the USSR.
  2  He initiated Five-Year Plans for industry in which production
targets were set for every industry right down to individual
factories.
  3  The first two Five-Year Plans concentrated mainly on heavy
industry – iron, coal and steel – and to a lesser extent on
mining, chemicals and transport.
  4  A feature of the plans was gigantic spectacular projects like the
Moscow Metro.
  5  The plans were very successful. Production from heavy
industries rose dramatically, huge new industrial plants were
built, new cities appeared and a modern industrial state was
created. However, the quality of goods was often poor and
there were inefficiencies.
  6  Stalin needed to make farming more modern to produce the
food he needed for the workers. He used collectivisation to do
this.
  7  Many peasants resisted and were shot, sent to labour camps
or exiled. Millions fled to the new cities to become workers.
  8  As a result of this disruption, food production fell and there was
a famine in parts of the USSR, especially Ukraine, in 1932–33.
  9  However, Stalin had got what he wanted from collectivisation:
food for the workers, food to export abroad, more industrial
workers and control of the peasants and the food supply.
10  The Russian people paid a high cost for Stalin’s economic
policies.
Revision Tip
Remember:
•  one way industrialisation made life better and one way it made it
worse
•  one way collectivisation made life better and one way it made life
worse.
How did Stalin control the Soviet
Union?
Terror
Using terror to control Russians had been a feature of the Tsar’s regime. It
had also been a feature of the communist state under Lenin, but Stalin took it
to a new level. He was determined to crush any oppos ition from inside or
outside the Communist Party. He used his secret police, the NKVD, and labour
camps, called the ‘GULAG’, to terrorise his people into obe dience.
SOURCE 17
A tribute to Comrade Stalin was called for. Of course, everyone
stood up … for three minutes, four minutes, the ‘stormy applause,
rising to an ovation’ continued … Who would dare to be the first to
stop? After all, NKVD men were standing in the hall waiting to see
who quit first! After 11 minutes the director [of the factory] … sat
down … To a man, everyone else stopped dead and sat down.
They had been saved! … That, however, was how they discovered
who the independent people were. And that was how they
eliminated them. The same night the factory director was arrested.
Alexander Solzhenitsyn, Gulag Archipelago,
published in 1973. Solzhenitsyn lost his Soviet
citizenship as a result of this book.
The Purges
By 1934, s ome leading communists wanted to slow the pace of
industrialisation to make life more bearable for ordinary Russians. When
Sergei Kirov suggested this at a Party conference, he was widely supported.
There was talk of him replacing Stalin as leader.
Soon after, Kirov w as mysteriously murdered (probably on Stalin’s orders)
then Stalin used this as an excuse to ‘purge’ the Communist Party of his
oppon ents (suppos edly to unmask spies and conspirators). He arranged a
series of SHOW TRIALS where leading Bolsheviks confessed to their crimes,
probably because of torture or threats to their families. In the first big trial in
1936 K amenev and Zinoviev were tried along with fourteen others. Bukharin
was tried in 1938. However, these PURGES were not restricted to leading
Party members. Around 500,000 C ommunist Party members were arrested
and either executed or sent to labour camps. Those left learned to carry out
Stalin’s orders to the letter.
The Purges went beyond the Communist Party. As you saw in previous pages
anyone who stood i n the way of industrialisation or collectivisation might be
deported or executed. Anybody  suspected of disloyalty to Stalin was
arrested. Many people were denounced by neighbours trying to prove they
were loyal. University lecturers and teachers, miners and engineers, factory
managers and ordinary workers disappeared. It is said that every family in
the USSR lost someone in the Purges.
Stalin also purged the army, removing 25,000 of ficers – around one in five –
including its supreme commander, Marshal Tukhachevsky, who had
disagreed with Stalin in the past.
By 1937 a n estimated 18 m illion people had been transported to labour
camps. Ten million died. Stalin seriously weakened the USSR by removing
so many able individuals. He had also succeeded in destroying any sense of
independent thinking. Everyone who was spared knew that their lives
depended on thinking exactly as Stalin did.
SOURCE 18
Stalin shown holding a young child, Gelya
Markizova, in 1936. Stalin had both of her
parents killed. This did not stop him using this
image on propaganda leaflets to show him as
a kind, fatherly figure.
SOURCE 19
Russian exiles in France made this mock
travel poster in the late 1930s. The text says:
‘Visit the USSR’s pyramids!’
Source Analysis
Choose either Source 19 or 21.
1  Summarise the message of the cartoon in your own words.
2  Do you think either of these cartoons could have been published
in the USSR?
A new Constitution
In 1936 S talin created a new Constitution for the USSR. It gave freedom of
speech and free elections to the Russian people. This was, of course, a
cosmetic measure. Only Communist Party candidates were allowed to stand
in elections, and only approved newspapers and magazines could be
published.
Propaganda
Despite all this, if you had visited the Soviet Union in the 1930s , you would
probably have found that most Soviet citizens admired, or even loved, Stalin.
They saw him as a great leader driving them forward to a great future.
This is partly because of the Soviet propaganda machine. Stalin understood
the pow er of ideas and the media. Newspapers were censored or run by
government agencies. The radio was under state control. The state used
propaganda extensively in posters, information leaflets and public events.
They created a ‘cult of personality’. There were photographs and statues
everywhere (most homes had their own portrait of Stalin on the wall).
Processions in praise of Stalin were held regularly in towns and cities. He
was presented as a super-human being, almost godlike.
Stalin enjoyed the worship he received. Moreover, he wanted to make
himself an important historical figure. He had history book s rewritten to
show himself and Lenin as the only real heroes of the Revolution. Others,
like Trotsky, were removed from the story.
SOURCE 20
One of Stalin’s opponents deleted from a
photograph, 1935. Techniques of doctoring
pictures became far more sophisticated in the
1930s. This allowed Stalin to create the
impression that his enemies had never
existed.
SOURCE 21

A cartoon published by Russian exiles in
Paris in 1936. The title of the cartoon is ‘The
Stalinist Constitution’ and the text at the
bottom reads ‘New seating arrangements in
the Supreme Soviet’.
SOURCE 22
These men lifted their villainous hands against Comrade Stalin. By
lifting their hands against Comrade Stalin, they lifted them against
all of us, against the working class … against the teaching of Marx,
Engels, Lenin … Stalin is our hope, Stalin is the beacon which
guides all progressive mankind. Stalin is our banner. Stalin is our
will. Stalin is our victory.
From a speech made by Communist leader
Nikita Khrushchev in 1937, at the height of the
Purges. (Khrushchev later became leader of
the USSR and in 1956 announced a ‘DE-
STALINISATION’ programme.
Revision Tip
You should have a view on whether terror or propaganda was more
important in securing Stalin’s rule. You need to:
•  know at least two events which show how the terror regime
worked
•  be able to describe at least two examples of propaganda
•  practise explaining which you think was more important – it does
not matter which you decide as long as you can explain your
reasoning.
FOCUS TASK 8.17
Why did Stalin launch the Purges?
Some say that Stalin launched the Purges because he was power-
mad and paranoid. Do you agree with this? Here are other possible
reasons. Using the evidence on this page, which of these seem
most believable? Which can you discount altogether?
•  To ensure his economic policies succeeded
•  To remove potential rivals in the Communist Party
•  To ensure the army stayed loyal
•  To remove independent thinkers
•  To boost his reputation as the supreme ruler of Russia.
Society and culture under Stalin
FOCUS TASK 8.18
How were Soviet people affected by Stalin’s rule?
Work with a partner to produce a presentation to answer this
question. You will find useful information on pages 232–235 but you
could do further research in the library or online.
You will need to look at as many as possible of the following
aspects of life in the USSR:
•  industrialisation
•  the growth of towns and cities
•  collectivisation
•  control and terror
•  religion
•  music and arts
•  education
•  social attitudes.
For each aspect:
Slide 1 should summarise the policy. Follow ‘the rule of five’ for
presentations – maximum five bullet points, maximum five words
per bullet. For example:
Industrialisation – summary
•  Aim: to modernise USSR
•  Be able to challenge West
•  Five Year Plans
•  Key industries developed
•  Significant achievements
Slide 2 should explain how groups, individuals, organisations or
nationalities gained from the policy and how they gained. If the
answer is none, say so!
Industrialisation – winners
•  No unemployment
•  Training
•  Work for women
•  State provided accommodation
Slide 3 should be a ‘loser’ slide. Again, if there are no losers, say
so.
Religion
Religion came under sustained attack. Many churches were closed, priests
deported and church buildings pulled dow n. Priests were not allowed to
vote. By 1939 on ly one in forty churches still held regular services in the
USSR. Despite this, in the 1937 c ensus, around 60 pe r cent of Russians said
that they were Christians. Muslims were banned from practising Islamic law
and women encouraged to abandon the veil. In 1917 t here were 26,000
mosques in Russia but by 1939 t here were only 1300.
Music and arts
Music and arts were carefully monitored by the NKVD. Poets and
playwrights praised Stalin either directly or indirectly. Composers such as
Shostakovich wrote music praising him and lived in dread of Stalin’s
disapproval. Artists and writers were forced to adopt a style called Soviet
Realism. This meant that paintings and novels had to glorify ordinary
workers, inspire people with socialism, and help build the future. Paintings
showed happy collective farm workers in the fields or workers striving in
the factories. It was a similar situation with literature (see Source 23).
SOURCE 23
Whoever said that Soviet literature contains only real images is
profoundly mistaken. The themes are dictated by the Party. The
Party deals harshly with anybody who tries to depict the real state
of affairs in their literature.
Is it not a fact that all of you now reading these lines saw people
dying in the streets in 1932? People, swollen with hunger and
foaming at the mouth, lying in their death throes in the streets. Is it
not a fact that whole villages full of people perished in 1932? Does
our literature show any of these horrors, which make your hair
stand on end? No. Where will you find such appalling things
depicted in Soviet literature? You call it realism?
A protest note pinned on the walls of a
college by students in November 1935.
Think!
1  Why did Stalin try to reduce the influence of religion?
2  How effective were his policies?
3  What does the story of Shostakovich tell historians about life for
musicians under Stalin? Use the internet to look up other artists
or writers such as Maxim Gorky.
Education and youth organisations
By the early 1930s  Stalin set about reforming the Soviet education system.
The discipline of teachers and parents was emphasised. Strict programmes of
work were set out for key subjects like mathematics, physics and chemistry.
History textbook s presented Stalin’s view of history. There were compulsory
lessons in socialist values and how a Soviet citizen should behave. Children
under fifteen joined the Pioneers where they were indoctrinated with
communist views, encouraged to be loyal to the state and to behave like a
good c itizens.
SOURCE 24
I, a Young Pioneer of the Soviet Union, in the presence of my
comrades, solemnly promise to love my Soviet motherland
passionately, and to live, learn and struggle as the great Lenin
bade us and the Communist Party teaches us.
The promise made by each member of the
Young Pioneers.
Women in Stalin’s USSR
Women were given the same educational and employment oppor tunities as
men. By 1935 s ome 42 pe r cent of all industrial workers were women. The
Second Five-Year Plan in particular would have failed without the huge
influx of women workers. Some women were enrolled into technical training
programs and management positions; although the vast majority of women
remained in relatively low-paid industrial jobs or traditional roles.
The Communists challenged traditional views about women and the family.
Communists thought that women should be free and not tied dow n to men by
marriage. They envisaged that children would be looked after in crèches and
kindergartens. Divorce was made very easy and there was abortion on
demand. However, the reality did not live up to the dream. Many men
abandoned their wives as soon as they became pregnant. In 1927 t wo-thirds
of marriages in Moscow ended in divorce. The promised state kindergartens
never appeared and thousands of women were left to manage as best they
could with jobs and children.
The Great Retreat
By the mid-1930s  the regime attempted to re-impose traditional family
values and discipline, often called ‘the Great Retreat’.
•  Abortion was made illegal except to protect the health of the mother.
•  Divorce was made more difficult. Divorcing couples had to go to court and
pay a fee.
•  Divorced fathers had to pay maintenance for their children.
•  Mothers received cash payments of 2000 r oubles per year for each child
up to age five.
•  A new law in 1935 a llowed the NKVD to deal harshly with youth crime.
•  Parents could be fined if their children caused trouble.
It is very hard to judge the impact of these measures although they tended to
have a much greater impact on women than men as they restricted many of the
new oppor tunities which had ope ned up. Overall, however, interviews with
survivors from the period suggest that most people supported the Great
Retreat policies.
SOURCE 25
Interviews with Soviet citizens who fled the USSR in the Second
World War showed that support for welfare policies, support for
strong government and patriotic pride were all robust – and this
was from a sample of persons who had shown their hatred of Stalin
by leaving the country.
An extract from A History of Modern Russia
by Robert Conquest, published in 2003.
Conquest is a well-known historian in this
field.
Equality
One of the main aims of communism was to make people more equal and life
fairer for all members of society. Critics of communism have usually pointed
out that it made life equally bad for everyone in society. There is some
evidence to support this.
•  The buying pow er of a worker’s wage fell by over 50 pe r cent during the
first Five-Year Plan.
•  The average worker in 1930s  Moscow ate only 20 pe r cent of the meat and
fish he ate in 1900.
•  Housing was hard to find and expensive.
•  It was difficult to get clothing, shoes and boot s. Queuing to buy goods
became part of life.
On the other hand, there were some positives. Health care improved
enormously. Education improved and public libraries became available.
Literacy was a high priority. Sports facilities were good i n most towns and
cities.
However, despite its ideology communism created a new social hierarchy.
•  If you were ambitious, you could join the new ‘class’ of skilled workers or
become a foreman, supervisor or technician.
•  Above  them was an army of managers. Managers could get items like
clothing and luxuries in the official Party shops.
•  At the very top w as a new ruling class – the nom e nc l at ur a. This was the
group loyal to Stalin who took all the top jobs in the Communist Party and
government. They and their families enjoyed many privileges such as
better housing, food, c lothes and schools for their children.
Revision Tip
A major area of debate is whether the Soviet people gained or lost
more under Stalin. Find two examples of gains and losses in this
period and make sure you can explain why you chose them.
These groups did well out of the new industrial society. Their support was
vital in helping Stalin control Soviet society.
The nationalities
Russia and the USSR were not the same thing. Russia was the dom inant
republic in a large collection of republics (the USSR), which included many
different languages, religions and national identities.
Stalin regarded the nationalities with suspicion. In 1932 a  new regulation
required Soviet citizens to carry identity book lets which specified their
nationality. Many nationalities found that their homelands were dramatically
changed by many Russian migrant workers who were sent to develop new
industrial projects.
In some areas whole popu lations were deported from their homes because
Stalin did not trust them. Between 1935 a nd 1938 S talin deported members
of at least nine different ethnic groups. For example, when Japan began to
expand in the Far East Stalin deported 142,000 K oreans from his easternmost
borders. Other groups were persecuted because of long-standing prejudices.
For example, Jews still suffered discrimination and the Finnish popu lation in
the region around Leningrad fell by one-third during the 1930s .
SOURCE 26
Pages from a children’s textbook published in
the Soviet Republic of Uzbekistan in central
Asia, near to Afghanistan. Under Stalin
children of the nationalities were taught about
the benefits of communism in their own
language because it was thought to be more
effective. Here the people are benefitting
from the introduction of tractors and it is
interesting to note that the tractor driver is a
woman.
How complete was Stalin’s control
over the Soviet Union by 1941?
By 1941 S talin was the supreme unchallenged leader of Soviet Russia, but
how far was he in complete control?
On the one hand…
In the Purges, which had mainly ended in 1938, S talin had:
•  removed all the old Bolsheviks capable of forming an alternative
government and replacing him as leader
•  removed the main officers in the army likely to cause him any trouble
•  cowed intellectuals in education, sciences and the arts, making them
unlikely to voi ce criticisms of his policies
•  terrified the popu lation at large who did not know where accusations of
disloyalty might come from and feared being picked up by the secret police
•  got rid of many of the unruly and disruptive elements in society by sending
them to the Gulag where they might prove more useful as slave labour.
The vast organisation of the secret police, the NKVD, stood be hind Stalin
and behind the NKVD lay the terror of the Gulag CONCENTRATION CAMPS.
Stalin’s position was cemented by the cult of the personality, which led many
Russians to regard him as an almost superhuman leader whom they revered
and even loved. Those who did not go along with the hype were very
reluctant to voi ce their views in public. Stalin had complete control of the
media and propaganda, which repeated the message that Stalin was great and
the only person who could lead Russia to a bright future.
But on the other hand…
Soviet Russia was a still a difficult country to rule.
•  Stalin found it difficult to control regions away from Moscow. People,
including Communist officials, ran their own areas to suit themselves and
would not always carry out instructions from the centre.
•  There was a lot of bribery and corruption, especially as everybody  had to
reach unrealistic production targets in industry. Nobody , even Communist
Party officials, wanted to be accused of not fulfilling targets, so they
fiddled the figures, produced sub-standard goods  or simply did not tell the
centre what was going on.
•  Even those higher up cheated and manipulated the system so they could
escape any blame. The whole central planning system was rough and
unwieldy despite the fact that it achieved its broad aims.
Soviet Russia in the 1930s  was never very stable. Millions of people moved
around as industrialisation created vast new centres and peasants were
thrown off the land. People came and went seeking jobs and accommodation
or trying to escape the authorities. Thousands changed jobs regularly so they
could not be tracked dow n and subjected to the harsh labour laws, or to get
better wages, especially if they were skilled workers. In all this fluid mix
there were embittered, rebellious and criminal elements as well as young
people who would not conform to Soviet laws, rules and regulations. Some
historians think the Purges were in part an attempt to control this moving
mass and weed out the troublemakers. But Stalin could never really bring this
‘quicksand society’ under control.
In the countryside, Stalin had subdued the peasants through collectivisation
but most were still aggrieved by the loss of their land and independence.
They adapted to the Stalinist system but resisted where they could. They
made life difficult for farm managers, were insubordinate, neglected their
jobs, were apathetic and generally did not work hard. Agriculture never
performed as well as it should have done.
We know that Stalin tried to control things personally as far as he could. He
sent out a constant stream of notes and letters giving very specific
instructions about what should be done, even dow n to particular industrial
plants. In letters to his henchmen Stalin talks frequently about fulfilling
targets ‘with unrelenting firmness and ruthlessness’. These could be used as
evidence of Stalin’s control but the frustration expressed in the letters can
also be seen as evidence that Stalin was not able to get them to do w hat he
wanted (see Source 27 for example).
SOURCE 27
There are abominations in the supply of metal for the Stalingrad
Tractor Plant and the Moscow and Gorky auto plants. It is
disgraceful that the windbags at the People’s Commissariat of
Heavy Industry have still not gotten around to straightening out the
supply system. Let the Central Committee place under its
continuous supervision, without delay, the plants that are supplying
them and make up for this disruption.
Stalin writing in 1932 to his deputy,
Kaganovich.
FOCUS TASK 8.19
Stage 1: What methods did Stalin use to control the USSR?
Draw up and complete a table to make notes and record examples
for the methods of control listed. You can add more/different
methods if you wish.
•  Terror
•  Purges
•  Force
•  Propaganda
•  The cult of personality
•  Education and youth groups
•  Mass media and the arts
•  Improved living conditions
Stage 2: How complete was Stalin’s control over the Soviet
Union by 1941?
Now use your notes from Stage 1 to write an answer to this
question:
‘By 1941 Stalin had complete control of the Soviet Union because
he had crushed all opposition.’ How far do you agree with this
statement? Explain your answer.
You should structure this in three sections or paragraphs:
1  The argument that Stalin was in control. Here you should include:
    •  examples of the methods he used
    •  evidence that these methods actually worked (e.g. source
extracts).
2  The argument that Stalin was not in control or that his control
was not as great as it appeared. Here you should include:
    •  examples of resistance to Stalin and his methods
    •  an explanation of how serious this resistance was.
3  Your overall judgement as to how complete his control really was
(e.g. that his control was not complete but the resistance was
limited).
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Autocracy
•  Bolshevik
•  Capitalist
•  Civil War
•  Collectivisation
•  Communist
•  Cossack
•  Duma
•  Five-Year Plan
•  Gulag
•  Industrialisation
•  Kerensky
•  Kolkhoz
•  Kulak
•  Lenin
•  Marxist
•  Mensheviks
•  Nationalities
•  New Economic Policy
•  NKVD
•  Okhrana
•  Peasants
•  Propaganda
•  Provisional Government
•  Purges
•  Show trials
•  Social Democratic Party
•  Socialist Revolutionaries
•  Soviet Union
•  Soviets
•  Stakhanovite
•  Stalin
•  Stolypin
•  Trotsky
•  Tsar
•  Tsarina
•  USSR
•  War Communism
•  Zemstva
Key Question Summary
How did Stalin gain and hold on to power?
  1  Stalin emerged as the new leader of Russia through a mixture
of political cunning, ruthlessness and the mistakes of the other
contenders.
  2  He gained control of the Party machine and could appoint his
supporters to key positions. He outmanoeuvred his opponents
by playing them off against each other.
  3  Stalin’s policy of ‘Socialism in one country’ was popular and
appealed to Russian nationalism.
  4  Stalin used terror to control the USSR, backed by an effective
secret police force and the Gulag labour camps.
  5  From 1936 he used the Purges to make sure he remained
leader. He set up show trials to get rid of the old Bolsheviks
who might form an alternative government and to frighten
others.
  6  He purged the Communist Party to make sure it would carry out
his orders without question.
  7  He purged the army to get rid of any officers who might be
disloyal to him.
  8  He undertook a general purge of the population to instil fear so
that they would do as they were told. He got rid of leading
members of the intelligentsia in education and the arts. He also
got rid of troublesome individuals on the fringes of society who
did not fit into the Stalinist system.
  9  A cult of the personality promoted Stalin as a godlike leader
who could guide the USSR to a great future.
10  Stalin tried to control what people thought through the mass
media, education, the arts and culture in general. He tried to
suppress religion but was not successful.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
Paper 1-type questions
1  (a)  What were the Five-Year Plans? [4]
    (b)  Explain why Stalin was so committed to modernising industry
in the USSR. [6]
    (c)  ‘The Five-Year Plans brought glory to Stalin but misery to his
people.’ How far do you agree with this statement? Explain
your answer. [10]
Paper 4-type questions
2  How important was the disunity of the Whites in the Bolshevik
victory in the Civil War in Russia?
3  How significant was the role of terror and repression in
maintaining Stalin’s control of the USSR?
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
9 Germany, 1918–45
KEY QUESTIONS
9A  Was the Weimar Republic doomed from the start?
9B  Why was Hitler able to dominate Germany by 1934?
9C  How effectively did the Nazis control Germany, 1933–45?
9D  What was it like to live in Nazi Germany?

This Nazi poster from the 1930s encouraged people to turn to Nazi-
led community groups for help and advice.
1  Using this source, describe the Nazis’ ideal family.
2  What are the Nazis offering this ideal family and how is it
represented in the poster?
3  Does this poster give the impression that people were afraid of
the Nazis?
4  What message is the poster trying to convey to Germans?
Germany emerged from the First World War in a state of chaos. The new
WEIMAR Government struggled from crisis to crisis. Out of this confusion
Adolf Hitler and the Nazis emerged as the most pow erful group in Germany
and led the nation into a period of  DICTATORSHIP ending in an international
war and the deaths of tens of millions of people.
How could this happen in a modern, democratic European state?
In 9A you will investigate how the Weimar Republic was created out of post-
war chaos and how its leaders tried to solve the problems left over from the
war.
In 9B you will focus on the same period bu t view it through a different lens
and examine the reasons for the birth and growth of the Nazi Party. You will
see how its early failures turned into a runaway success after the ECONOMIC
DEPRESSION hit Germany in the early 1930s .
The Nazis had a very specific vision of what Germany should be like and
they did not tolerate oppos ition. In 9C you will examine how they imposed
their will on the German people through a combination of terror and
PROPAGANDA.
In 9D you will see how specific groups of people were affected by Nazi rule
– young people, women, workers and farmers – and how the lives of
Germans began to change again as a result of the Second World War.
Timeline
This timeline shows the period you will be covering in this chapter. Some of
the key dates are filled in already. To help you get a complete picture of the
period m ake your own much larger version and add ot her details to it as you
work through the chapter.

9A Was the Weimar Republic doomed
from the start?
The impact of the First World War
In 1914 t he Germans were a proud people. Their KAISER – virtually a
DICTATOR – was celebrated for his achievements. Their army was probably
the finest in the world. A journey through the streets of Berlin in 1914 w ould
have revealed prospering businesses and a well-educated and well-fed
workforce. There was great optimism about the pow er and strength of
Germany.
Four years later a similar journey would have revealed a very different
picture. Although little fighting had taken place in Germany itself, the war
had still destroyed much of the old Germany. The proud German army was
defeated. The German people were surviving on turnips and bread, and even
the flour for the bread was mixed with sawdust to make it go further. A flu
epidemic was sweeping the country, killing thousands of people already
weakened by lack of food.
FOCUS
The democratic Weimar Government was set up in 1919, but it
collapsed in 1933 and was replaced by a Nazi dictatorship. Was
this inevitable? Many have argued it was because of:
•  a weak CONSTITUTION
•  huge post-war problems
•  being forced to sign the TREATY OF VERSAILLES.
However, others would disagree because there were significant
political economic and cultural achievements, especially from 1924–
29.
There is plenty of evidence on both sides of the debate. As you
study these events you can reach your own conclusions on these
issues and arrive at your own judgement about whether the Weimar
Republic was doomed to fail.
Focus Points
•  How did Germany emerge from defeat at the end of the First
World War?
•  What was the impact of the Treaty of Versailles on the Republic?
•  To what extent did the Republic recover after 1923?
•  What were the achievements of the Weimar period?
The end of the old Germany
By the autumn of 1918 G ermany had clearly lost the war. Germany was in a
state of chaos, as you can see from the diagram on page 243. The Allies
offered Germany peace, but under strict conditions. One condition was that
Germany should become more democratic and that the Kaiser should
abdicate. When the Kaiser refused, sailors in northern Germany mutinied and
took over the town of Kiel. This triggered other revolts. The Kaiser’s old
enemies, the Socialists, led uprisings of workers and soldiers in other
German ports. Soon, other German cities followed. In Bavaria an
independent Socialist Republic was declared. On 9 November 1918 t he
Kaiser abdicated his throne and left Germany for the Netherlands.
The following day, the Socialist leader Friedrich EBERT became the new
leader of the Republic of Germany. He immediately signed an ARMISTICE
with the Allies. The war was over. He also announced to the German people
that Germany had a new government – a REPUBLIC.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can:
•  describe one social, one economic and one political impact of the
war on Germany.
•  explain how at least two of these factors made it difficult for the
new German Government.
FOCUS TASK 9.1
How did Germany emerge from defeat in the First World War?
1 Use the information on these two pages to make a list of all the
challenges facing Ebert when he took over in Germany in 1918.
You could organise the list into sections:
    •  Political challenges
    •  Social challenges
    •  Economic challenges.
2 Imagine you are advising Ebert. Explain what you think are the
three most serious challenges that need tackling urgently.
3 Take a class vote and see if you can all agree on which are the
most serious challenges.
Impact of the war on Germany by 1918
ECONOMIC IMPACT Germany was virtually bankrupt
National income was about one-third of what it had been in 1913.
There were acute shortages of food. By 1918 Germany was
producing only 50 per cent of the milk and 60 per cent of the butter
and meat it had produced before the war. Fuel was short and
people were cold. Nearly 300,000 people died from starvation and
hypothermia in 1918.
War left 600, 000 widows and 2 million children without fathers - by
1925 the state was spending about one-third of its BUDGET in war
pensions.
Industrial production was about two-thirds of what it had been in
1913.
SOCIAL IMPACT The war had deepened divisions in
German society
There were huge gaps between the living standards of the rich and
the poor.
One and a half million demobilised soldiers returned to society,
many disillusioned.
Many German workers were bitter at the restrictions placed on
their earnings during the war while the factory owners made vast
fortunes from the war.
Many Germans were angry about losing the war. There was a
wave of unrest, especially in cities like Berlin. Law and order was
breaking down in a country where people were used to order and
discipline.
POLITICAL IMPACT Germany had a revolution and became
an unstable democratic republic. Groups with extremist
political views tried to gain power.
Stresses of war led to a revolution in October -November 1918.
There was fighting between RIGHT-WING groups and LEFT-WING
groups.
Many ex-soldiers and civilians despised the new democratic
leaders and came to believe that the heroic leader Field Marshal
Hindenburg had been betrayed by weak politicians.
A new Germany: The Weimar Republic
In January 1919 f ree elections took place for the first time in Germany’s
history. Ebert’s party won a majority and he became the president of the
Weimar Republic. It was called this because, to start with, the new
Government met in the small town of Weimar rather than in the German
capital, Berlin. Even in February 1919, B erlin was thought to be too vi olent
and unstable.
The success of the new Government would depend on two key factors:
•  Factor 1: The Constitution: Would the new Constitution provide a
practical, workable solution to the challenge of ruling Germany? It was
designed to be as democratic as possible and to represent the many
different groups which made up German society. The Factfile explains how
the Constitution worked.
•  Factor 2: The German people: Would the German people accept an
almost instant change from the traditional, autocratic German system of
government to this new democratic system?
The prospects for this did not look good. The reaction of politicians and
many ordinary Germans was unenthusiastic. Ebert faced oppos ition from
both right and left.
•  On the right wing, nearly all the Kaiser’s former advisers remained in
their positions in the army, judiciary, civil service and industry. They
restricted what the new Government could do. Many still hoped for a
return to rule by the Kaiser. A pow erful myth developed that men such as
Ebert had ‘stabbed Germany in the back’ and caused the defeat in the war.
•  On the left wing there were many communists who believed that at this
stage what Germany actually needed was a communist revolution, just like
Russia’s in 1917.
FOCUS TASK 9.2
What were the strengths and weaknesses of the Weimar
Constitution?
1  Make a list of what you think seem to be the strengths of the
Weimar Constitution.
2  Here are some concerns expressed at the time about the
weaknesses of the Constitution. For each one explain how the
Constitution might allow such things to happen.
    •  The Constitution is too democratic – even small and extreme
parties could get seats in the Reichstag.
    •  If the Chancellor cannot get the support of the Reichstag he
will be unable to pass any laws or other measures, or it will
take an enormous amount of time to get measures through.
    •  If the various parties in the Reichstag refuse to work together
there could be a stalemate.
    •  The president might abuse his powers under Article 48.
Factfile
The Weimar Constitution
•  Before the war Germany had no real DEMOCRACY. The Kaiser
was virtually a dictator.
•  The Weimar Constitution, on the other hand, attempted to set up
probably the most democratic system in the world where no
individual could gain too much power.
•  All Germans over the age of twenty could vote.
•  There was a system of proportional representation – if a party
gained 20 per cent of the votes, they gained 20 per cent of the
seats in the Parliament (REICHSTAG).
•  The CHANCELLOR was responsible for day-to-day government, but
he needed the support of half the Reichstag.
•  The head of state was the president. The president stayed out of
day-to-day government. In a crisis he could rule the country
directly through Article 48 of the Constitution. This gave him
emergency powers, which meant he did not have to consult the
Reichstag.
The Republic in danger, 1919–24
From the start, Ebert’s Government faced violent oppos ition from both left-
wing and right-wing oppon ents.
The threat from the Left
One left-wing group was known as the SPARTACISTS. They were
communists led by Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. Their
party was much like Lenin’s Bolsheviks, which had just taken power
in Russia. They wanted a Germany ruled by workers’ councils or
soviets.
Early in 1919 the Spartacists launched their bid for power. Joined
by rebel soldiers and sailors, they set up soviets in many towns.
Not all soldiers were on the side of the Spartacists, however. Some
anticommunist ex-soldiers had formed themselves into vigilante
groups called FREIKORPS. Ebert made an agreement with the
commanders of the army and the Freikorps to put down the
rebellion. Bitter street fighting and heavy casualties followed.
Eventually the Freikorps won and Liebknecht and Luxemburg were
murdered.
The Spartacist rising was soon followed by another rebellion in
Bavaria in the south of Germany. Ebert used the same tactics as
he had used against the Spartacists. The Freikorps moved in to
crush the revolt in May 1919. Around 600 communists were killed.
In 1920 there was more communist agitation in the RUHR industrial
area. Again police, army and Freikorps clashed with communists.
There were 2000 casualties.
Ebert’s ruthless measures against the communists created lasting
bitterness between them and his Socialist Party. However, it gained
approval from many in Germany. Ebert was terrified that Germany
might go the same way as Russia (at that time rocked by bloody
civil war). Many Germans shared his fears. Even so, despite these
defeats, the communists remained a powerful antigovernment force
in Germany throughout the 1920s.
The threat from the Right
At the same time, Ebert’s Government faced violent opposition
from the Right. His right-wing opponents were largely people who
had grown up in the successful days of the Kaiser’s Germany.
They resented the new Germany and above all they deeply
resented the humiliating Treaty of Versailles, which they blamed
Ebert for agreeing to (see page 246).
In March 1920 Dr Wolfgang Kapp led 5000 Freikorps into Berlin in
a rebellion known as the KAPP PUTSCH (‘PUTSCH’ means rebellion).
The army refused to fire on the Freikorps and it looked as if
Ebert’s Government was doomed. However, it was saved by the
German people, especially the industrial workers of Berlin. They
declared a GENERAL STRIKE which brought the capital to a halt with
no transport, power or water. After a few days Kapp realised he
could not succeed and fled the country. He was hunted down and
died while awaiting trial. It seemed that Weimar had support and
power after all.
Even so, the rest of the rebels went unpunished by the courts and
judges. Ebert’s Government struggled to deal with the political
violence in Germany. Political assassinations were frequent. In the
summer of 1922 Ebert’s foreign minister Walther Rathenau was
murdered by extremists. Then in November 1923 Adolf Hitler led an
attempted rebellion in Munich, known as the MUNICH PUTSCH (see
page 253). Both Hitler and the murderers of Rathenau received
short prison sentences. It seemed that Weimar’s right-wing
opponents had friends in high places.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe:
•  at least one strength and one weakness of the Weimar
Constitution, and why it was a strength or weakness
•  at least one example of left-wing and one example of right-wing
revolts and how each was defeated.
Think!
1  Draw up a table like the one below to compare the various
threats from Left and Right described on this page.
 Left wing Right wing
Name of group   
Leadership   
Demands/aims   
Supported by   
Methods   
How defeated   
Consequences   
2  What differences can you see between how Ebert’s Government
treated left-wing and right-wing extremists? How can you explain
this?
The Treaty of Versailles
The biggest crisis for the new republic came in May 1919 w hen the terms of
the Treaty of Versailles were announced. You can read more about this in
Chapter 1. Most people in Germany were appalled, bu t the right-wing
oppon ents of Ebert’s Government were particularly angry. They blamed
Ebert’s Government for betraying Germany.
SOURCE 1
Versailles was a scandal and a disgrace and … the dictate signified
an act of highway robbery against our people.
Extract from Hitler’s biography Mein Kampf,
1925.
Germany lost:
•  10 pe r cent of its land
•  all of its overseas colonies
•  12.5 pe r cent of its popu lation
•  16 pe r cent of its coal and 48 pe r cent of its iron industry.
In addition:
•  Its army was reduced to 100,000;  it was not allowed to have an air force;
its navy was reduced.
•  Germany had to accept blame for starting the war and was forced to pay
reparations.
Most Germans were appalled. Supporters of the Weimar Government felt
betrayed by the Allies. The Kaiser was gone – why should they be punished
for his war and aggression? Oppon ents of the regime turned their fury on
Ebert.
Ebert himself was very reluctant to sign the Treaty, but he had no choice.
Germany could not go back to war. However, in the minds of many Germans,
Ebert and his Weimar Republic were forever to blame for the Treaty. The
injustice of the Treaty became a rallying point for all Ebert’s oppon ents.
They believed that the German army had been ‘stabbed in the back’ by the
Socialist and Liberal politicians who agreed an armistice in November
1918. They believed that Germany had not been beaten on the battlefield, bu t
that it had been betrayed by its civilian politicians who didn’t dare continue
the war. The Treaty was still a source of bitterness in Germany when Hitler
came to pow er in 1933.
FOCUS TASK 9.3
What was the impact of the Treaty of Versailles on the
Republic?
1  Research: Using all the information and sources on pages 246–
248 and pages 14–17 in Chapter 1, find out the impact of the
Treaty on:
    a)  German territory
    b)  the armed forces
    c)  German attitudes and national pride
    d)  the economy
    e)  political stability.
2  Reach a judgement: Which of these do you think was most
damaging to the Weimar Republic in:
    •  the short term (in 1920)
    •  the long term (by 1923)?
Support your answer with evidence from your research.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe at least two ways (one political, one
economic) the Treaty affected Germany.
SOURCE 2
Nazi cartoon commenting on the military
terms of the Versailles treaty.
Source Analysis
Study Source 2 carefully.
1  What point is the cartoonist making about the relationship
between France and Germany?
2  What point is the cartoonist making about the relationship
between France and the other countries?
Economic disaster
The Treaty of Versailles destabilised Germany politically, but Germans also
blamed it for another problem – economic chaos. See if you agree that the
Treaty of Versailles was responsible for economic problems in Germany.
Reparations
The Treaty of Versailles forced Germany to pay reparations to the Allies.
The reparations bill was announced in April 1921. It was set at £6600
million, to be paid in annual instalments of 2 pe r cent of Germany’s annual
output. The Germans protested that this was an intolerable strain on the
economy, which they were struggling to rebuild after the war, but their
protests were ignored.
SOURCE 3
There was widespread hunger, squalor and poverty and – what
really affected us – there was humiliation. The French ruled with an
iron hand. If they disliked you walking on the pavement, for
instance, they’d come along with their riding crops and you’d have
to walk in the road.
The memories of Jutta Rudiger, a German
woman living in the Ruhr during the French
occupation.
The occupation of the Ruhr
The first instalment of £50 m illion was paid in 1921, bu t in 1922 n othing was
paid. Ebert did his best to play for time and to negotiate concessions from the
Allies, but the French in particular ran out of patience. They too had war
debts to pay to the USA. So in January 1923 F rench and Belgian troops
entered the Ruhr (quite legally under the Treaty of Versailles) and began to
take what was owed to them in the form of raw materials and goods .
The results of the occupation of the Ruhr were disastrous for Germany. The
Government ordered the workers to go on strike. That way, there would be
nothing for the French to take away. The French reacted harshly, killing over
100 w orkers and expelling over 100,000 pr otesters from the region. More
importantly, the halt in industrial production in Germany’s most important
region caused the collapse of the German currency.
SOURCE 4
A British cartoon from 1921. The two
watchers are the leaders of France and
Britain.
SOURCE 5
A 1923 German poster discouraging people
from buying French and Belgian goods, as
long as Germany is under occupation. The
poster reads, ‘Hands off French and Belgian
goods as long as Germany is raped!’ Bochun
and Essen are two industrial towns in the
Ruhr.
Source Analysis
Work in pairs. One study Source 4 and the other Source 5. Explain
the message of your source to your partner.
•  Remember to make a valid inference (for example, the cartoonist
is saying…).
•  Then remember to support the inference with a detail from the
source (for example this is shown in the cartoon by…).
Hyperinflation
Because it had no goods  to trade, the Government simply printed money. For
the Government this seemed an attractive solution. It paid off its debts in
worthless marks, including war loans of over £2200 m illion. The great
industrialists were able to pay off all their debts as well.
This set off a chain reaction. With so much money in circulation, but not
enough goods  to buy with it, prices and wages rocketed, bu t people soon
realised that this money was worthless. Workers needed wheelbarrows to
carry home their wages. Wages began to be paid daily instead of weekly. The
price of goods  could rise between joining the back of a queue in a shop and
reaching the front!
Poor people suffered, bu t in some ways those who lost most were middle-
class Germans. A prosperous middle-class family would find that their
savings, which might have bought a house in 1921, by  1923 w ould not even
buy a loaf of bread. Pensioners found that their monthly pension would not
even buy one cup of coffee. The Government had lost the support of the
middle classes.
It was clear to all, both inside and outside Germany, that the situation needed
urgent action. In August 1923 a  new government under Gustav Stresemann
took over.
SOURCE 6
A photograph taken in 1923 showing a
woman using worthless banknotes to start
her fire.
•  He called off the passive resistance in the Ruhr.
•  He called in the worthless marks and burned them, replacing them with a
new currency called the Rentenmark.
•  He negotiated to receive American loans under the DAWES PLAN.
•  He even renegotiated the reparations payments.
The economic crisis was solved very quickly. Some historians suggest that
this is evidence that Germany’s problems were not as severe as its
politicians at the time had made out.
SOURCE 7
 1918 0.63 marks
 1922 163 marks
January 1923 250 marks
July 1923 3465 marks
September1923 1,512,000 marks
November 1923 201,000,000,000 marks
The rising cost of a loaf of bread in Berlin.
It was also increasingly clear, however, that the hyperinflation had don e great
political damage to the Weimar Government. Their right-wing oppon ents had
yet another problem to blame them for, and many linked it to the hated Treaty
of Versailles which the Government had signed. They blamed reparations and
the Weimar politicians who had agreed to pay them. Many Germans never
forgave them.
SOURCE 8
One afternoon I rang Aunt Louise’s bell. The door was opened
merely a crack. From the dark came a broken voice: ‘I’ve used 60
billion marks’ worth of gas. My milk bill is 1 million. But all I have
left is 2000 marks. I don’t understand any more.’
E. Dobert’s memoir, Convert to Freedom,
published in 1941. Dobert was a working-
class German who converted to Nazism.
Revision Tip
Hyperinflation
Make sure you can describe:
•  two causes and two effects of hyperinflation
•  two actions Stresemann took to tackle the crisis
•  one reason why Germans blamed the Treaty of Versailles for
hyperinflation.
Weimar Republic 1919–23
You also need to be able to:
•  describe at least two other challenges facing the Weimar
Republic 1919–23
•  explain why each one was a challenge
•  take a view on which of your two challenges was most
threatening.
FOCUS TASK 9.4
What was the most serious challenge for the Weimar Republic
in the period 1919–23?
The diagram on the right shows different challenges which faced
the Weimar Republic in the period 1919–23. At the moment they
are shown as equally serious. Redraw the diagram so that the
most serious challenge is largest, the next most serious is next
largest, and so on. Also add notes to each sector explaining why it
was a serious challenge.
The Weimar Republic under
Stresemann, 1923–29
Although Chancellor for only a few months, Gustav Stresemann was a
leading member of every government from 1923 t o 1929. He was a more
skilful politician than Ebert, and, as a right-winger, he had wider support. He
was also helped by the fact that through the 1920s  the rest of Europe was
gradually coming out of its post-war depression.
FIGURE 9
Comparison of aspects of the German
economy in 1913, 1923 and 1928.
Achievement 1: The economy
Slowly but surely, Stresemann rebuilt Germany’s prosperity. Under the
Dawes Plan (see page 42), reparations payments were spread ove r a longer
period, a nd 800 m illion marks in loans from the USA poured into German
industry. Some of the money went into German businesses to help them
replace old equipment with the latest technology. Some went into public
works like swimming pool s, sports stadia and apartment blocks. As well as
providing facilities, these projects created jobs.
By 1927 G erman industry seemed to have recovered very well. In 1928
Germany finally achieved the same levels of production as before the war
and regained its place as the world’s second greatest industrial pow er
(behind the USA). Wages for industrial workers rose and for many Germans
there was a higher standard of living.
Reparations were being paid and exports were on the increase. The
Government was even able to increase welfare benefits and wages for state
employees.
Think!
1  List the factors that helped Germany’s economy to recover, for
example reduced reparations.
2  In what ways did economic recovery affect the lives of ordinary
Germans?
Achievement 2: Politics
Even politics became more stable. There were no more attempted
revolutions after 1923. One politician who had been a leading oppon ent of
Ebert in 1923 s aid that ‘the Republic is beginning to settle and the German
people are becoming reconciled to the way things are’. Figure 10 shows that
the parties that supported Weimar democracy did well in these years. By
1928 t he moderate parties had 136 m ore seats in the Reichstag than the
RADICAL parties. Hitler’s Nazis gained less than 3 pe r cent of the vote in the
1928 e lection. Just as importantly, some of the parties who had co-operated
in the ‘revolution’ of 1918 be gan to co-operate again.
FIGURE 10
Support for the main political parties in
Germany, 1919–28.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe how the Dawes Plan worked.
•  Describe one way in which German politics was more settled in
this period.
•  Practise explaining to someone else why the Nazis were
unsuccessful in this period.
Achievement 3: Culture
There was also a cultural revival in Germany. In the Kaiser’s time there had
been strict CENSORSHIP, but the Weimar Constitution allowed free expression
of ideas. Writers and poe ts flourished, especially in Berlin. Artists in
Weimar Germany turned their back on old styles of painting and tried to
represent the reality of everyday life, even when that reality was sometimes
harsh and shocking. Artists like George Grosz produced pow erful paintings
such as Pillars of Society, which criticised pol iticians and business, Church
and army leaders of the Weimar period. It showed them as callous and
mindless. Other paintings highlighted how soldiers had been traumatised by
their experiences in the war.
The famous BAUHAUS style of design and architecture developed. Artists
such as Walter Gropius, Paul Klee and Wassily Kandinsky taught at the
Bauhaus design college in Dessau. The Bauhaus architects and designers
rejected traditional styles to create new and exciting buildings and obj ects.
They produced designs for anything from chairs and desk lamps to art
galleries and factories. The first Bauhaus exhibition attracted 15,000
visitors.
SOURCE 11
A photograph of a Berlin nightclub in 1920.
The 1920s  were a golden age for German cinema, producing one of its
greatest ever international stars, Marlene Dietrich, and one of its most
celebrated directors, Fritz Lang. Berlin was famous for its daring and
liberated nightlife. Going to clubs was a major pastime. In 1927 t here were
900 da nce bands in Berlin alone. Cabaret artists performed songs criticising
political leaders that would have been banned in the Kaiser’s days. These
included songs about sex that would have shocked an earlier generation of
Germans.
Achievement 4: Foreign policy
Stresemann’s greatest triumphs were in foreign policy. In 1925 h e signed the
Locarno Treaties, guaranteeing not to try to change Germany’s western
borders with France and Belgium. As a result, in 1926 G ermany was
accepted into the League of Nations. Here Stresemann began to work, quietly
but steadily, on reversing some of the terms of the Treaty of Versailles,
particularly those concerning reparations and Germany’s eastern frontiers.
By the time he died in 1929, S tresemann had negotiated the YOUNG PLAN,
which further lightened the reparations burden on Germany and led to the
final removal of British, French and Belgian troops  from the RHINELAND.
Problem 1: The economy
The economic BOOM in Weimar Germany was precarious. The US loans
could be called in at short notice, which would cause ruin in Germany.
The boom  also increased inequality. The main economic winners in Germany
were big businesses (such as the steel and chemicals industries) which
controlled about half of Germany’s industrial production. Other winners
were big landowners, particularly if they owned land in towns – the value of
land in Berlin rose by 700 pe r cent in this period. The workers in the big
industries gained as well. Most Weimar governments were sympathetic
towards the unions, which led to improved pay and conditions. However,
even here there were concerns as unemployment began to rise – it was 6 pe r
cent of the working popu lation by 1928.
The main losers were the peasant farmers and sections of the middle classes.
The peasant farmers had increased production during the war. In peacetime,
they were producing too m uch. They had loans to pay back but not enough
demand for the food t hey produced. Many small business owners became
disillusioned during this period. Small shopkeepers saw their businesses
threatened by large department stores (many of which were owned by Jews).
A university lecturer in 1913 e arned ten times as much as a coal miner. In the
1920s  he only earned twice as much. These people began to feel that the
Weimar Government offered them little.
SOURCE 12
What we have today is a coalition of ministers, not a coalition of
parties. There are no government parties, only opposition parties.
This state of things is a greater danger to the democratic system
than ministers and parliamentarians realise.
Gustav Stolper, a Reichstag member for the
DDP in 1929.
Problem 2: Politics
Despite the relative stability of Weimar politics in this period, bot h the Nazis
and Communists were building up their party organisations. Even during
these stable years there were four different Chancellors and it was only the
influence of party leaders which held the party coalitions together (see
Source 12).
More worrying for the Republic was that around 30 pe r cent of the vote
regularly went to parties oppos ed to the Republic. Most serious of all, the
right-wing organisations which posed the greatest threat to the Republic were
quiet rather than destroyed. The right-wing Nationalist Party (DNVP) and the
Nazis began to collaborate closely and make themselves appear more
respectable. Another event which would turn out to be very significant was
that the German people elected a new president in 1925 w ho was oppos ed to
democracy. Hindenburg even wrote to the (exiled) Kaiser for approval
before he took up the post!
Problem 3: Culture
Weimar culture was colourful and exciting to many. However, for others
living in Germany’s villages and country towns, the culture of the cities
represented moral decline, made worse by American immigrants and Jewish
artists and musicians. As you have read, the Bauhaus design college was in
Dessau. What you were not told is that it was in Dessau because it was
forced out of Weimar by hostile town officials.
Organisations such as the Wandervogel movement were a reaction to Weimar
culture. The Wandervogel called for a return to simple country values. It
wanted to see more help for the countryside and less decadence in the towns.
It was a pow erful feeling, which the Nazis successfully used in later years.
Problem 4: Foreign policy
There was also the question of international relations. Nationalists attacked
Stresemann for joining the League of Nations and for signing the Locarno
Pact because it meant Germany accepted the Treaty of Versailles.
Communists also attacked Locarno, seeing it as part of a plot against the
communist government in the USSR.
FOCUS TASK 9.5
To what extent did the Weimar Republic recover after 1923?
Draw a diagram like this then complete it to summarise the
strengths (+) and weaknesses (-) of the Weimar Republic in 1929.
You could give each sector a mark out of ten.
Finally, you need to decide on an overall judgement: in your opinion,
how far had the Weimar Republic recovered? In your answer, do
remember that, in the view of many historians, it was probably a
major achievement for the Weimar Republic just to have survived.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe:
•  one example of cultural achievement and one example of
economic achievement in this period
•  one group who were winners in the Weimar period and explain
why they were winners
•  one group who were losers in the Weimar period and explain
why they were losers.
Key Question Summary
Was the Weimar Republic doomed from the start?
1  Germany emerged from the First World War in a poor state,
short of food and goods and in debt. It was an angry, bitter and
divided society – politically (between left- and right-wing views)
and socially (rich and poor).
2  The Weimar Republic was created in this turbulent time. Its
Constitution was very democratic but it had weaknesses. In
particular, its system of proportional representation meant that it
was difficult for any political party to get a clear majority and
provide strong government.
3  Its leaders signed the armistice to end the war (the ‘stab in the
back’) and the hated Treaty of Versailles. This gave some
Germans a poor view of democratic government and the Weimar
Republic from the beginning.
4  Challenges from the Left (Spartacists, 1919) and Right (Kapp
Putsch, 1920 and Munich Putsch, 1923) created political
instability.
5  The Treaty of Versailles harmed Germany economically
(reparations, loss of territory and industry) and psychologically
(WAR GUILT, national pride).
6  One consequence of the Treaty, the occupation of the Ruhr, led
to the hyperinflation of 1923.
7  The economy recovered after 1924 as Germany was put on a
sounder financial footing. However, prosperity depended on
American loans, and unemployment remained a problem.
8  Germany became more stable politically after 1924 and
extremists parties, like the Nazis, did not do well in elections
through the 1920s.
9  Given the problems that the Weimar Republic started with it was
an achievement just to have survived to 1929. This proved it was
not ‘doomed from the start’.
9B Why was Hitler able to dominate
Germany by 1934?
FOCUS
Stresemann’s Government succeeded in stabilising Germany.
However, as you have already seen, the extremist opponents of the
Weimar Government had not disappeared. Through the 1920s they
were organising and regrouping, waiting for their chance to win
power.
One of these extremist groups was the Nazi Party. You are now
going to look back at what it had been doing since 1919 and
examine its changing fortunes through the 1920s and early 1930s.
Your key question examines how the Nazis turned themselves from
an obscure fringe party in the 1920s to the most popular party in
Germany by 1933. You will see that there are a range of factors
including Hitler’s skills as a leader and the economic Depression
that hit Germany in the 1930s.
You will also examine the ruthless way that once elected as
Chancellor Hitler CONSOLIDATED his power by removing all possible
opposition.
Focus Points
•  What did the Nazi Party stand for in the 1920s?
•  Why did the Nazis have little success before 1930?
•  Why was Hitler able to become Chancellor by 1933?
•  How did Hitler consolidate his power in 1933–34?
Profile
Adolf Hitler – the early years, 1889–1919
•  Born in Austria in 1889.
•  He got on badly with his father but was fond of his mother.
•  At sixteeen he left school and went to Vienna to become a
painter. He did not succeed and between 1909 and 1914 he was
‘down and out’ living on the streets of Vienna.
•  During this period he developed his hatred of foreigners and
Jews.
•  In 1914 Hitler joined the German army and served with
distinction, winning the Iron Cross.
•  Hitler found it very hard to accept the armistice and was
completely unable to accept the Treaty of Versailles.
•  He despised Weimar democracy and like many Germans looked
back to the ‘glorious days’ of the Kaiser.
•  After the war, Hitler stayed working for the army spying on
extremist groups. This is how he came across the German
Workers’ Party. He liked their ideas and joined in 1919.
Hitler and the Nazis
The Nazis began as the German Workers’ Party, led by Anton Drexler. In
1919 A dolf Hitler joined the party. Drexler soon realised that Hitler had
great talent and within months he had put him in charge of propaganda and the
political ideas of the party. In 1920 t he party announced its Twenty-Five
Point Programme (see Factfile), and renamed itself the National Socialist
German Workers’ Party, or Nazis for short.
In 1921 H itler removed Drexler as leader. Hitler’s energy, commitment and
above  all his pow er as a speaker were soon attracting attention, as you can
see from Source 1.
Hitler had a clear and simple appeal. He stirred nationalist passions in his
audiences. He gave them scapegoats to blame for Germany’s problems: the
Allies, the Versailles Treaty, the ‘November Criminals’ (the Socialist
politicians who signed the Treaty), the Communists and the Jews.
His meetings were so successful that his oppon ents tried to disrupt them. To
counter this, he set up the SA, also known as Stormtroope rs or Brownshirts,
in 1921. These hired thugs protected Hitler’s meetings but also disrupted
those of other parties.
Factfile
Twenty-Five Point Programme
The most important points were:
•  the abolition of the Treaty of Versailles
•  union of Germany and Austria
•  only ‘true’ Germans to be allowed to live in Germany. Jews in
particular were to be excluded
•  large industries and businesses to be nationalised
•  generous old-age pension
•  a strong central government.
SOURCE 1
The most active political force in Bavaria at the present time is the
National Socialist Party … It has recently acquired a political
influence quite disproportionate to its actual numerical strength …
Adolf Hitler from the very first has been the dominating force in the
movement and the personality of this man has undoubtedly been
one of the most important factors contributing to its success … His
ability to influence a popular assembly is uncanny.
American intelligence report on political
activities in Germany, 1922.
The Munich Putsch, 1923
By 1923 t he Nazis were still very much a minority party, but Hitler had given
them a high profile. In November 1923 H itler believed that the moment had
come for him to topple the Weimar Government. The Government was
preoccupied with the economic crisis. Stresemann had just called off
Germany’s passive resistance in the Ruhr (see page 247). On 8 November,
Hitler hijacked a local government meeting and announced he was taking
over the government of Bavaria. He was joined by the old war hero
Ludendorff.
Nazi Stormtroope rs began taking over official buildings. The next day,
however, the Weimar Government forces hit back. Police rounded up the
Stormtroope rs and in a brief exchange of shots sixteen Nazis were killed by
the police. The rebellion broke up in chaos. Hitler escaped in a car, while
Ludendorff and others stayed to face the armed pol ice. Hitler had gambled
and miscalculated and his revolution had failed. But this was not quite the
end of the story.
SOURCE 2
Hitler knew how to whip up those crowds jammed closely in a
dense cloud of cigarette smoke – not by argument, but by his
manner: the roaring and especially the power of his repetitions
delivered in a certain infectious rhythm … He would draw up a list
of existing evils and imaginary abuses and after listing them, in
higher and higher crescendo, he screamed: ‘And whose fault is it?
It’s all … the fault … of the Jews!’
A person who went to Nazi meetings
describes the impact of Hitler’s speeches.
From A Part of Myself: Portrait of an Epoch,
by C. Zuckmayer, 1966.
SOURCE 3
A painting of the Munich Putsch made by
Arthur Wirth, one of the Nazis who took part
in it. Hitler is in the centre and Ludendorff is in
the black hat to Hitler’s right.
Source Analysis
1  What impression does Source 3 give of the Putsch and Hitler’s
role in it?
2  Why would you have concerns about it as a source for finding out
what happened?
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe two aims of the Nazis before 1923.
•  Explain one way in which the Munich Putsch was a disaster for
the Nazis and one way it was a success.
The aftermath of the Munich Putsch
In the short term, the Munich Putsch was a disaster for Hitler. He had
miscalculated the mood of  the German people and the Nazis had been
humiliated. People did not rise up to support him. He and other leading Nazis
were arrested and charged with treason.
However, from a longer-term point of view, the Putsch turned out to be less
of a disaster. At his trial Hitler gained enormous publicity for himself and his
ideas, as his every word was reported in the newspapers.
In fact, Hitler so impressed the judges that he and his accomplices got off
very lightly. Ludendorff was freed altogether and Hitler was given only five
years in prison, even though the legal guidelines said that high treason should
carry a life sentence. In the end, Hitler only served nine months of the
sentence and did so in great comfort in Landsberg Castle. This last point was
very significant. It was clear that Hitler had some sympathy and support from
important figures in the legal system. Because of his links with Ludendorff,
Hitler probably gained the attention of important figures in the army. Time
would show that Hitler was dow n, but not out.
SOURCE 4
When I resume active work, it will be necessary to pursue a new
policy. Instead of working to achieve power by armed conspiracy
we shall have to take hold of our noses and enter the Reichstag
against the Catholic and Marxist deputies. If out-voting them takes
longer than out-shooting them, at least the results will be
guaranteed by their own constitution. Any lawful process is slow.
Sooner or later we shall have a majority and after that we shall
have Germany.
Hitler, writing while in prison in 1923.
The Nazis in the wilderness, 1924–29
Hitler used his time in prison to write a book , Mein Kampf (My Struggle),
which clarified and presented his ideas about Germany’s future (see Factfile
and Sources 1–3 on page 58).
It was also while in prison that he came to the conclusion that the Nazis
would not be able to seize pow er by force. They would have to work within
the democratic system to achieve pow er but, once in pow er, they could
destroy that system (see Source 4).
As soon as he was released from prison, Hitler set about rebuilding the Nazi
Party so that it could take pow er through democratic means. He saw the
Communists building up their strength through youth organisations and
recruitment drives. Soon the Nazis were doing the same.
Their candidates stood i n the Reichstag elections for the first time in May
1924 a nd won 32 s eats. Encouraged by this, Hitler created a network of local
Nazi parties which in turn set up the HITLER YOUTH, the Nazi Students’
League and similar organisations.
Factfile
Hitler’s views
In Mein Kampf and his later writings, Hitler set out the main Nazi
beliefs:
•  National Socialism: This stood for loyalty to Germany, racial
purity, equality and state control of the economy.
•  Racism: The Aryans (white Europeans) were the Master Race.
All other races and especially the Jews were inferior.
•  Armed force: Hitler believed that war and struggle were an
essential part of the development of a healthy Aryan race.
•  Living space (‘Lebensraum’): Germany needed to expand as its
people were hemmed in. This expansion would be mainly at the
expense of Russia and Poland.
•  The Führer: Debate and democratic discussion produced
weakness. Strength lay in total loyalty to the leader (the Führer).
SOURCE 5
Three million people lack work and sustenance … The illusion of
freedom, peace and prosperity that we were promised … is
vanishing …
Thus we demand the right of work and a decent living for every
working German.
While the soldier was fighting in the trenches to defend his
Fatherland, some Jewish profiteer robbed him of hearth and home.
The Jew lives in palaces … Therefore we demand homes for
German soldiers and workers. If there is not enough money to
build them, drive the foreigners out so that Germans can live on
German soil.
These days anyone has the right to speak in Germany – the Jew,
the Frenchman, the Englishman, the League of Nations. Everyone
but the German worker. He has to shut up and work. Every four
years he elects a new set of torturers, and everything stays the
same. Therefore we demand the annihilation of this system of
exploitation!
Extracts from a pamphlet called ‘We
demand’, written in 1927 by Nazi propaganda
expert Joseph Goebbels.
Source Analysis
1  Read Source 5. List the demands made by Goebbels.
2  Would you say this source appeals more to the hearts of German
people than to their minds? Support your answer with evidence
from the source.
A change of strategy
As you can see from Source 5, by 1927 t he Nazis were still trying to appeal
to German workers. However, most workers supported either the Socialists
or the Communists. In the 1928 e lections the Nazis gained only twelve
Reichstag seats (a quarter of the Communist vote). Although their anti-
Semitic policies gained them some support, they had failed to win over the
workers. Although the Nazis argued that workers were exploited, in fact
urban industrial workers felt that they were doing rather well in Weimar
Germany in the years up to 1929.
Target the farmers
Other groups in society were doing less well, however. The Nazis found that
they gained more support from groups such as the peasant farmers in northern
Germany and middle-class shopkeepers and small business people in country
towns.
Unlike Britain, Germany still had a large rural popu lation that lived and
worked on the land – pr obably about 35 pe r cent of the entire popu lation.
They were not sharing in Weimar Germany’s economic prosperity. The Nazis
highlighted the importance of the peasants in their plans for Germany,
promising to help agriculture if they came to pow er. They praised the
peasants as racially pure Germans (see the image in Source 7 for example).
Nazi propaganda also contrasted the suppos edly clean and simple life of the
peasants with that of the allegedly corrupt, immoral, crime-ridden cities (for
which they blamed the Jews). The fact that the Nazis despised Weimar
culture also gained them support among some conservative people in the
towns, who saw Weimar’s flourishing art, literature and film achievements as
immoral.
SOURCE 6
At one of the early congresses I was sitting surrounded by
thousands of SA men. As Hitler spoke I was most interested at the
shouts and more often the muttered exclamations of the men
around me, who were mainly workmen or lower-middle-class
types. ‘He speaks for me … Ach, Gott, he knows how I feel’ … One
man in particular struck me as he leant forward with his head in his
hands, and with a sort of convulsive sob said: ‘Gott sei Dank [God
be thanked], he understands.’
E. Amy Buller, Darkness over Germany,
published in 1943. Buller was an anti-Nazi
German teacher.
SOURCE 7
A Nazi election poster from 1928, showing a
farmer. The caption says ‘Work, freedom and
bread! Vote for the National Socialists.’
Strengthen the SA
In 1925 H itler enlarged the SA. About 55 pe r cent of the SA came from the
ranks of the unemployed. Many were ex-servicemen from the war. He also
set up a new group called the SS. The SS were similar to the SA but were
fanatically loyal to Hitler personally. Membership of the party rose to ove r
100,000 by  1928.
Spread the message
Hitler appointed Joseph Goebbels to take charge of Nazi propaganda.
Goebbels was highly efficient at spreading the Nazi message. He and Hitler
believed that the best way to reach what they called ‘the masses’ was by
appealing to their feelings rather than by rational argument. Goebbels
produced pos ters, leaflets, films and radio broadcasts; he organised rallies;
he set up ‘photo oppor tunities’.
But … no breakthrough
Despite these shifting policies and priorities, there was no electoral
breakthrough for the Nazis. Even after all their hard work, in 1928 t hey were
still a fringe minority party who had the support of less than 3 pe r cent of the
popu lation. They were the smallest party with fewer seats than the
Communists. The prosperity of the Stresemann years and Stresemann’s
success in foreign policy made Germans uninterested in extreme politics.
FOCUS TASK 9.6
What did the Nazis stand for in the 1920s?
1  Using the information and sources from pages 252–256, draw
up a diagram or chart to represent the Nazis’ ideas. You can use
this for revision so make the headings big and bold. You can use
the ones below and/or add others of your own:
    •  The Treaty of Versailles
    •  Greater Germany
    •  The German people
    •  Lebensraum
    •  Race and the Jews
    •  Government/Weimar Republic
    •  Economic policies
    •  Social policies.
2  What was the biggest change in Nazi policy after 1923?
FOCUS TASK 9.7
Stage 1: Why did the Nazis have little success before 1930?
Below are some factors which explain the Nazis’ lack of success.
At the moment these factors are organised in alphabetical order.
Work in groups to rearrange these factors into what you think is
their order of importance:
•  Disastrous Putsch of 1923
•  Disruption of meetings by political enemies
•  Lack of support in the police and army
•  Most industrial workers supported left-wing parties
•  Nazi aims were irrelevant to most Germans
•  Successes of Weimar Government (for example in the economy,
foreign policy)
Stage 2: What successes did the Nazis have before 1930?
The 1920s was not a good period for the Nazis but it was not a
complete failure. Draw a line and mark one end ‘Total failure’ and
the other end ‘Great success’. In the middle, write ‘Important
development’. Now consider where the following events and
developments belong on the line:
•  The 25 Points
•  Hitler’s speaking ability
•  Munich Putsch
•  Hitler’s trial after the Munich Putsch
•  Changing policies targeting different groups to win support
•  Expanding the SA
•  Appointing Goebbels in charge of propaganda
Add notes to explain your placing. NB You may show the same
event or development twice if its success changed at different
times.
Keep this work safe. It will be useful for Focus Task 9.9 on page
260.
The Depression and the rise of the
Nazis
In 1929 t he American STOCK MARKET crashed and sent the USA into a
disastrous ECONOMIC DEPRESSION. In a very short time, countries around the
world began to feel the effects of this depression. Germany was particularly
badly affected. American bankers and businessmen lost huge amounts of
money in the CRASH. To pay off their debts they asked German banks to repay
the money they had bor rowed. The result was economic collapse in
Germany. Businesses went bankrupt, workers were laid off and
unemployment rocketed. And Germany still had to pay the hated reparations
from the Treaty of Versailles. The Government tried to act but the Weimar
Constitution, with its careful balance of pow er, made firm and decisive
action by the Government difficult.
Revision Tip
•  Can you describe two effects of the Depression on Germans?
•  Make sure you can explain two ways in which the Depression
helped the Nazis.
SOURCE 8

The German mining region of Upper Silesia in
1932: unemployed miners and their families
moved into shacks in a shanty town because
they had no money to pay their rent.
Think!
Draw a diagram to show how the Wall Street Crash in New York
could lead to miners losing their jobs in Silesia (Source 8). You
could refer to Chapter 2 or Chapter 10.
Enter the Nazis!
Hitler’s ideas now seemed to have a special relevance:
•  Is the Weimar Government indecisive? Then Germany needs a strong
leader!
•  Are reparations adding to Germany’s problems? Then kick out the Treaty
of Versailles!
•  Is unemployment a problem? Let the unemployed join the army, build
Germany’s armaments and be used for public works like road building!
The Nazis’ Twenty-Five Points (see Factfile on page 252) were very
attractive to those most vulnerable to the Depression: the unemployed, the
elderly and the middle classes. Hitler offered them culprits to blame for
Germany’s troubles – the Allies, the ‘November Criminals’ and the Jews.
None of these messages was new and they had not won support for the Nazis
in the Stresemann years. The difference now was that the democratic parties
simply could not get Germany back to work.
In the 1930 e lections the Nazis got 107 s eats. In November 1932 t hey got
nearly 200. They did not yet have an overall majority, but they were the
biggest single party.
FIGURE 9
Support for the Nazis and Communists, and
unemployment, 1928–32.
Why did the Nazis succeed in elections?
The simple answer is: the Depression. But there were many other important
factors that allowed the Nazis to seize this oppor tunity.
Factor 1: Nazi campaigning
Nazi campaign methods were modern and effective.
The Nazis’ greatest campaigning asset was Hitler. He was a pow erful
speaker. Hitler ran for president in 1932. Despite his defeat, the campaign
raised his profile hugely. He was years ahead of his time as a communicator.
Using films, radio and records he brought his message to millions. He
travelled by plane on a hectic tour of rallies all over Germany. He appeared
as a dynamic man of the moment, the leader of a modern party with modern
ideas. At the same time, he was able to appear to be a man of the people,
someone who knew and understood t he people and their problems.
Nazi posters and pamphlets such as Sources 10 and 11 could be found
everywhere. Their rallies impressed people with their energy, enthusiasm
and sheer size.
SOURCE 10
An English translation of a 1931 Nazi election
poster.
The Nazis relied on generalised slogan s – ‘uniting the people’, ‘going back
to traditional values’ – bu t they were never very clear about what this meant
in terms of policies. This made it hard to criticise them. When they were
criticised for a specific policy, they were quite likely to drop it. (For
example, when industrialists expressed concern about Nazi plans to
nationalise industry, they simply droppe d the policy.) The Nazis repeated at
every oppor tunity that they believed Jews, communists, Weimar politicians
and the Treaty of Versailles were the causes of Germany’s problems. They
expressed contempt for Weimar’s democratic system and said that it was
unable to solve Germany’s economic problems.
SOURCE 11
A Nazi election poster from July 1932. The
Nazis proclaim ‘We build!’ and promise to
provide work, freedom and bread. They
accuse the opposing parties of planning to
use terror, corruption, lies and other
strategies as the basis for their government.
They backed up their campaigns with practical action. For example, Nazis
organised soup kitchens and provided shelter in hostels for the unemployed.
SOURCE 12
My mother saw a storm trooper parade in the streets of Heidelberg.
The sight of discipline in a time of chaos, the impression of energy
in an atmosphere of universal hopelessness seems to have won
her over.
Albert Speer, writing in 1931. Later, he was
to become an important and powerful Nazi
leader.
Revision Tip
Note two examples of increasing Nazi support and be ready to
explain why.
Factor 2: ‘Negative cohesion’
Cohesion means bringing together. The historian Gordon Craig believed the
Nazis benefited from ‘NEGATIVE COHESION’. People supported the Nazis not
because they shared Nazi views (that would be positive cohesion) but
because they shared Nazi fears: ‘If you hate what I hate, then I’ll support
you!’
Factor 3: Disillusionment with democracy
Perhaps the biggest negative was a dissatisfaction with democracy in Weimar
Germany. Politicians seemed unable to tackle the problems of the
Depression. When the Depression began to bite, Chancellor Brüning actually
cut government spending and welfare benefits. He urged Germans to make
sacrifices. Brüning called new elections in 1930. This was a disastrous
decision as it gave the Nazis the oppor tunity to exploit the discontent in
Germany. Unemployment was heading towards 6 million and the average
German’s income had fallen by 40 pe r cent since 1929.
SOURCE 13
Our opponents accuse us National Socialists, and me in particular,
of being intolerant and quarrelsome. They say that we don’t want to
work with other parties. They say the National Socialists are not
German at all, because they refuse to work with other political
parties. So is it typically German to have thirty political parties? I
have to admit one thing – these gentlemen are quite right. We are
intolerant. I have given myself this one goal – to sweep these thirty
political parties out of Germany.
Hitler speaking at an election rally, July 1932.
Factor 4: The Communist threat
As the crisis deepened, Communist support was rising too. The Nazis turned
this to their advantage. ‘Fear of COMMUNISM’ was another shared negative.
There were frequent street battles between communist gangs and the police.
Large unruly groups of unemployed workers gathered on street corners. In
contrast, the SA and SS gave an impression of discipline and order. Many
people felt the country needed this kind of order (see Source 12).
Business leaders feared the Communists because of their plans to introduce
state control of businesses. They were also concerned about the growing
strength of Germany’s TRADE UNIONS. They felt the Nazis would combat these
threats and some began to put money into Nazi campaign funds.
Think!
1  In a sentence explain ‘negative cohesion’ to someone who has
never heard the phrase.
2  Do you think Gordon Craig was right that people supported the
Nazis for negative reasons rather than positive reasons?
Farmers were also alarmed by the Communists. In the USSR, the communist
government had taken over all of the land. Millions of peasants had been
killed or imprisoned in the process. In contrast, the Nazis promised to help
Germany’s desperately struggling small farmers.
Factor 5: Decadence
As for modern decadent Weimar culture – the Nazis could count on all those
who felt traditional German values were under threat. The Nazis talked about
restoring these old-fashioned values.
Factor 6: Weak opposition
The SOCIAL DEMOCRATIC PARTY made a grave mistake in thinking that
German people would not fall for these vague promises and accusations.
They also failed to work with other parties, particularly the Communists. But
Ebert’s crushing of the Communists in 1919–20 l eft too m any bitter memories
and the Nazis exploited the divisions among their oppon ents.
The result
Nazi support rocketed. For example, in Neidenburg in East Prussia Nazi
support rose from 2.3 pe r cent in 1928 t o ove r 25 pe r cent in 1931, e ven
though the town had no local Nazi Party and Hitler never went there. We
know from the work of W.S. Allen that many Germans, especially middle-
class Germans, supported Hitler in villages, towns and cities across
Germany. In rural communities the Nazis gained many votes from those who
shared their views about the decadent cities.
FOCUS TASK 9.8
How did the Depression help the Nazis?
1  The Depression:
    •  made Weimar politicians look weak and indecisive
    •  made Germany less able to pay reparations
    •  increased unemployment and poverty in Germany
    •  increased support for communism.
    For each factor explain, with examples, how this helped the
Nazis.
2  Decide how far you agree with the following statement. Give it a
score out of five (five would mean total agreement).
    ‘Without the economic depression in Germany the Nazis would
have remained a minority party.’
    Write a short paragraph explaining your score.
How did Hitler become Chancellor?
July 1932
After the Reichstag elections of July 1932  the Nazis were the largest
single party (with 230 s eats) but did not have an overall majority. Hitler
demanded the post of Chancellor. However, Hindenburg was suspicious of
Hitler and refused. He allowed the current Chancellor Franz von Papen to
carry on. He then used his emergency pow ers to pass the measures that von
Papen hoped would solve the unemployment problem. However, von  Papen
was soon in trouble. He had virtually no support in the Reichstag and so
called yet another election.
November 1932
In the November 1932 e lections the Nazis again came out as the largest
party, although their share of the vote fell. Hitler regarded the election as a
disaster. He had lost more than 2 million votes along with 38 s eats in the
Reichstag. The signs were that the Hitler tide had finally turned. The Nazis
started to run out of funds. Hitler is said to have threatened suicide.
December 1932
Hindenburg agai n refused to appoint Hitler as Chancellor. In December
1932 h e chose Kurt von Schleicher, one of his own advisers and a bitter rival
of von Papen. But within a month, however, von  Schleicher too w as forced to
resign.
By this time it was clear that the Weimar system of government was not
working. The system of balances and proportional representation meant that
no pol itical group was able to provide strong rule. This had left the 84-year-
old President Hindenburg to more or less run the country using his emergency
powers, supported by army leaders and rich industrialists. In one sense,
Hindenburg had already overthrown the principles of democracy by running
Germany with emergency pow ers. If he was to rescue the democratic system,
he needed a Chancellor who actually had support in the Reichstag.
January 1933
Hindenburg appointed Hitler. Through January 1933 H indenburg and von
Papen met secretly with industrialists, army leaders and pol iticians. On 30
January, to everyone’s surprise, they offered Hitler the post of Chancellor.
With only a few Nazis in the Cabinet and von  Papen as Vice Chancellor, they
were confident that they could limit Hitler’s influence and resist his extremist
demands. The idea was that the policies would be made by the Cabinet,
which was filled with conservatives like von Papen. Hitler would be there to
get support in the Reichstag for those policies and to control the Communists.
So Hitler ended up as Chancellor through a behind-the-scenes deal by some
German aristocrats. Both Hindenburg and von  Papen were sure that they
could control Hitler. They were very wrong.
Revision Tip
Describe three events (in date order) that brought Hitler to power in
1933.
FOCUS TASK 9.9
How did Hitler become Chancellor in 1933?
Here is a list of factors that helped Hitler come to power.
Hitler’s strengths
•  Hitler’s speaking skills
•  Propaganda campaigns
•  Their criticisms of the Weimar system of government
•  Nazi policies
•  Support from big business
•  Violent treatment of their opponents
Opponents’ weaknesses
•  Failure to deal with the Depression
•  Failure to co-operate with one another
•  Attitudes of Germans to the democratic parties
Other factors
•  Weaknesses of the Weimar Republic
•  Scheming of Hindenburg and von Papen
•  The impact of the Depression
•  The Treaty of Versailles
•  Memories of the problems of 1923
1  For each factor, write down one example of how it helped Hitler.
2  Give each factor a mark out of 10 for its importance in bringing
Hitler to power.
3  Choose what you think are the five most important factors and
write a short paragraph on each, explaining why you have
chosen it.
4  If you took away any of those factors, would Hitler still have
become Chancellor?
5  Were any of those five factors also present in the 1920s?
6  If so, explain why the Nazis were not successful in the 1920s.
Hitler consolidates his position
It is easy to forget, but when Hitler became Chancellor in January 1933 h e
was in a very precarious position (see Source 14). Few people thought he
would hold on to pow er for long. Even fewer thought that by the summer of
1934 h e would be the supreme dictator of Germany. He achieved this through
a clever combination of methods – some legal, others dubious. He also
managed to defeat or reach agreements with those who could have stoppe d
him.
Step 1: The Reichstag Fire
Once he was Chancellor, Hitler took steps to complete a Nazi take-over of
Germany. He called another election for March 1933 t o try to get an overall
Nazi majority in the Reichstag. He used the same tactics as in previous
elections, but now he had the resources of state media and control of the
streets. Even so, success was in the balance. Then on 27 F ebruary there was
a dramatic development: the Reichstag building burnt dow n. Hitler blamed
the Communists and declared that the fire was the beginning of a communist
uprising. He demanded special emergency pow ers to deal with the situation
and was given them by President Hindenburg. The Nazis used these pow ers
to arrest Communists, break up meetings and frighten voters.
There have been many theories about what caused the fire, including that it
was an accident, the work of a madman, or a Communist plot. Many Germans
at the time thought that the Nazis might have started the fire themselves.
SOURCE 14
A British cartoon from early 1933. Hitler, as
Chancellor, is being supported by Hindenburg
and Von Papen.
Source Analysis
This source can be interpreted in different ways.
•  Does it show Hitler pressing down and controlling von Papen and
Hindenburg or
•  Is it saying that without these men holding Hitler up he would be
nowhere?
Come to your own decision as to which is the best interpretation and
explain your answer.
SOURCE 15
The defeat in 1918 did not depress me as greatly as the present
state of affairs. It is shocking how day after day naked acts of
violence, breaches of the law, barbaric opinions appear quite
undisguised as official decree. The Socialist papers are
permanently banned. The ‘Liberals’ tremble. The Berliner Tageblatt
was recently banned for two days; that can’t happen to the
Dresdener Neueste Nachrichten, it is completely devoted to the
government … I can no longer get rid of the feeling of disgust and
shame. And no one stirs; everyone trembles, keeps out of sight.
An extract for 17 March 1933 from the diary
of Victor Klemperer, a Jew who lived in
Dresden and recorded his experiences from
1933 to 1941.
Think!
1  Some people suggest that the Nazis burnt down the Reichstag
themselves. Explain why the Nazis might have wanted to do this.
2  Explain why the Enabling Act was so important to Hitler.
3  In the Night of the Long Knives, why might Hitler have executed
people such as von Schleicher who were nothing to do with the
SA?
4  Why do you think Hitler chose the support of the army over the
support of the SA?
Step 2: The Enabling Act
In the election, the Nazis won their largest-ever share of the votes and, with
the support of the smaller Nationalist Party, Hitler had an overall majority.
Using the SA and SS, he then intimidated the Reichstag into passing the
ENABLING ACT which allowed him to make laws without consulting the
Reichstag. Only the SPD voted against him. Following the election, the
Communists had been banned. The Catholic Centre Party decided to co-
operate with the Nazis rather than be treated like the Communists. In return,
they retained control of Catholic schools. The Enabling Act made Hitler a
virtual dictator. For the next four years if he wanted a new law he could just
pass it. There was nothing President Hindenburg or anyone else could do.
Even now, Hitler was not secure. He had seen how the Civil Service, the
judiciary, the army and other important groups had undermined the Weimar
Republic. He was not yet strong enough to remove his oppon ents, so he set
about a clever policy that mixed force, concessions and compromise (see
Factfile below).
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe how the Nazis reacted to the
Reichstag Fire.
•  Can you explain how the Enabling Act helped Hitler secure his
power?
Factfile
Nazi consolidation of power
•  30 January 1933 Hitler appointed Chancellor; Goering minister
of interior.
•  17 February Goering ordered local police forces to co-operate
with the SA and SS.
•  27 February Reichstag fire. Arrest of 4000 Communists and
other Nazi opponents on the same night.
•  28 February Emergency Decree issued by Hindenburg:
    –  police to arrest suspects and hold them without trial, search
houses, ban meetings, close newspapers and radio stations
    –  Hitler took over regional governments.
•  5 March Reichstag elections: government used control of radio
and police to intimidate opponents. Nazi election slogan was ‘The
battle against Marxism’. Won 43.9 per cent of vote.
•  13 March Goebbels appointed head of Ministry for Propaganda.
Took control of all media.
•  24 March The Enabling Act allowed Hitler to pass decrees
without the President’s involvement. This made Hitler a legal
dictator.
•  7 April Civil Service administration, court, and education purged
of ‘alien elements’, i.e. Jews and other opponents of the Nazis.
•  1 May Workers granted May Day holiday.
•  2 May Trade unions banned; all workers to belong to new
German Labour Front (DAF).
•  9 June Employment Law: major programme of public works
(e.g. road building) to create jobs.
•  14 July Law against the Formation of New Parties: Germany
became a ONE-PARTY STATE.
•  20 July CONCORDAT (agreement) with the Roman Catholic
Church: government protected religious freedom; Church banned
from political activity.
•  January 1934 All state governments taken over.
•  30 June NIGHT OF THE LONG KNIVES.
•  August On death of Hindenburg, Hitler became Führer. German
armed forces swore oath of loyalty to him.
Revision Tip
•  Choose three events from the Factfile and make sure you can
describe them accurately.
•  Give the Enabling Act and the Night of The Long Knives marks
out of ten for their importance. Now prepare two points that
justify your marks.
Step 3: The Night of the Long Knives
Within a year any oppon ents (or potential oppon ents) of the Nazis had either
left Germany or been taken to CONCENTRATION CAMPS run by the SS. Other
political parties were banned.
Hitler was still not entirely secure, however. The leading officers in the army
were not impressed by him and were particularly suspicious of Hitler’s SA
and its leader Ernst Röhm. The SA was a badly disciplined force (in
comparison with the army that is). What’s more, Röhm talked of making the
SA into a second German army. Hitler himself was also suspicious of Röhm
and feared that Röhm’s control over the 4 million SA men made him a
potentially dangerous rival.
Hitler had to choose between the army and the SA. He made his choice and
acted ruthlessly. On the weekend of 29–30 J une squads of SS men broke into
the homes of Röhm and other leading figures in the SA and arrested them.
Hitler accused Röhm of plotting to ove rthrow and murder him. Over the
weekend Röhm and pos sibly as many as 400 ot hers were executed. These
included the former Chancellor von Schleicher, a fierce critic of Hitler, and
others who actually had no connection with Röhm. This purge came to be
known as the Night of the Long Knives.
SOURCE 16
A Swiss cartoon commenting on the Night of
the Long Knives. Röhm was the head of the
SA and Heines was his deputy. The caption
for the cartoon is: ‘And the Führer said: Only
death can drive us apart.’
Hindenburg thanked Hitler for his ‘determined action which has nipped
treason in the bud’. The army said it was well satisfied with the events of the
weekend.
The SA was not disbanded. It remained as a Nazi paramilitary organisation,
but was very much subordinate to the SS. Many of its members were
absorbed by the army and the SS.
Step 4: The army oath
Soon after the Night of the Long Knives, Hindenburg died and Hitler took
over as Supreme Leader (Führer) of Germany. On 2 August 1934 t he entire
army swore an oath of personal loyalty to Adolf Hitler as Führer of
Germany. The army agreed to stay out of politics and to serve Hitler. In
return, Hitler spent vast sums on REARMAMENT, brought back CONSCRIPTION
and made plans to make Germany a great military pow er again.
FOCUS TASK 9.10
How did Hitler consolidate his power in 1933–34?
Work in groups of three. Take one of these topics each:
•  the Reichstag Fire
•  the Enabling Act
•  the Night of the Long Knives.
Report back to your group about how your event helped Hitler
consolidate power. Write a clear summary but then try to sum it up
in just a five-word headline.
Key Question Summary
Why was Hitler able to dominate Germany by 1934?
  1  The Nazi Party was formed in 1919 and Hitler soon became its
leader.
  2  Its 25-point programme appealed to ex-soldiers and those on
the Right but it did not enjoy wider support.
  3  While in prison after the Munich Putsch of 1923, Hitler wrote
Mein Kampf, setting out his ideas.
  4  The Nazi Party reorganised itself in the 1920s but was still a
fringe party in the 1928 elections.
  5  The Great Depression led to unemployment and economic
hardship, circumstances in which the Nazis could flourish.
  6  Nazi criticisms of the Weimar Government and the Treaty of
Versailles were popular along with their ideas on rebuilding
Germany.
  7  They used innovative techniques – rallies, slogans, films, radio,
posters and pamphlets – to put across their ideas.
  8  Hitler was a great asset as a highly effective speaker who
appeared to understand the people’s problems and express
their hopes.
  9  Disillusionment with the Weimar Republic pushed Germans
towards extremist parties, both the Nazis and the Communists.
10  There was violence and lawlessness and groups like
businessmen and farmers, who feared communism, liked the
Nazis’ anticommunist message.
11  The Nazis became the biggest single party in the 1932
elections.
12  The leaders of the Weimar Republic thought they could use
Hitler to their advantage by making him Chancellor. But he used
emergency powers and the Enabling Act to establish himself as
dictator.
9C How effectively did the Nazis
control Germany, 1933–39?
FOCUS
There was supposed to be no room for opposition of any kind in
Nazi Germany. The aim was to create a TOTALITARIAN state. In a
totalitarian state there can be no rival parties, no political debate.
Ordinary citizens must divert their whole energy into serving the
state and doing what its leaders want.
In this section you will examine how the Nazis combined the
strategies of terror and propaganda to control Germany.
Focus Points
•  How much opposition was there to the Nazi regime?
•  How effectively did the Nazis deal with their political opponents?
•  How did the Nazis use culture and the mass media to control the
people?
•  Why did the Nazis persecute many groups in German society?
•  Was Nazi Germany a totalitarian state?
The Nazi seizure of power
Nazi aims
Achieving political pow er was only the beginning of Nazi ambition. Hitler
wanted pow er in order to reshape Germany. The Nazis wanted to build:
•  A strong Germany. Hitler blamed Germany’s problems on weak
leadership. He wanted strong leadership as in the days of the Kaiser. He
wanted strong Germans, ready for war who were able to restore
Germany’s military pride.
•  A racially pure Germany. Hitler believed in Aryan supremacy and
blamed the Jews for many of Germany’s problems. He wanted to remove
Jews and other non-Aryans from any positions of leadership.
•  A People’s Community (or Volk). The Nazis wanted people to give their
hearts and minds to Hitler. In the VOLK people would see their contribution
to Germany as more important than their own fulfilment.
They intended to eliminate anything that stood i n the way of achieving these
aims. They started immediately Hitler took pow er in January 1933. The
speed and ruthlessness of this take-over took many Germans by surprise.
Political oppos ition was decapitated – its leaders imprisoned or intimidated
into silence.
Case study: The Nazi seizure of power in
Northeim
The historian W.S. Allen wrote a groundbreaking book  in the 1960s . He
interviewed hundreds of people in the small town of Northeim in northern
Germany about their experience of living under Nazi rule. He compiled an
incredibly thorough account of how the Nazis took control in this one town.
This process is summarised in the diagram on the oppos ite page.
The steps that took place in Northeim were replicated in thousands of other
small towns and communities around Germany.
How the Nazis seized power in the town of Northeim
1. They took over the council by bullying and intimidation. They had a
majority of 15:5 on the council. Before the first council meeting the police
arrested one oppos ition councillor. At the meeting they stationed SA officers
all around the room and refused to let oppos ition councillors speak. They
walked out in protest and were spat on by the SA officers as they left. They
never met again. That was the end of democracy in Northeim.
2. They set up a search of all houses in Northeim suppos edly looking for
illegal guns and ammunition. They ransacked homes and arrested 22 pe ople.
Seven were taken to the local concentration camp. The deeper impact of this
was that ordinary Northeimers got the message that the violence the Nazis
used against political oppon ents would also be applied to any person who
stepped out of line.
3. G l e i c h s c h al t u n g (co-ordination) of all organisations. They argued that
because the Nazis were a majority in national government that all local
bodies should also have a Nazi majority. The four sports clubs in Northeim
were combined into one Nazi-run sports club. Even the singing groups and
choirs were combined as the Nazi-led ‘Mixed choral singing club of 1933’ .
The aim was that whenever ordinary people got together to do a nything they
would be watched by a loyal Nazi.
4. Boycotting Jewish businesses. A newspaper campaign told Northeimers
not to shop at Jewish-run businesses. SA men were stationed outside to turn
people away.
5. By ending unemployment. This had been a key reason the Nazis had been
elected. In June 1933 t here were 500 r egistered unemployed in Northeim;
within three months there were none. Most were put to work repairing roads
and clearing the woods  around the town. However, socialists were
dismissed from jobs which were then given to Nazis. Unemployed socialists
were offered physically demanding work in the local quarry but only if they
agreed to give up pol itics.
6. Relentless propagan da. In the first three months of Nazi pow er they
organised a torrent of propaganda events including the ceremonial burning of
the Weimar flag; a book  burning to destroy unacceptable book s; and a
torchlight parade, joined by 3000 pe ople, through the streets to the park
where the local Nazi leader Ernst Girmann gave a speech saying, ‘The
individual is nothing! The Volk is everything! Once we unite internally, we
shall defeat the enemy!’
7. The rush to join the party. Northeimers could quickly see that to get
anywhere in Nazi Germany you had to join the party. By May membership
had rocketed to 1200 pe ople in a town of 10,000. Many of these were not
Nazi fanatics. They joined to keep safe or to keep their jobs.
Crushing opposition: The Nazi police
state
The Nazis had a range of pow erful ways to terrorise the German people. The
main organisations and methods are summarised below. However you will
quickly see as you read about each one that their roles overlap. If it seems
confusing, it was! Modern research suggests that Nazi Germany was in many
ways chaotic and disorganised. Nazi officials competed with each other to
get Hitler’s approval. The result was often a jumble of different
organisations competing with each other and getting in each other’s way.
However, even if it was confusing exactly who did what to whom there is no
doubting the overall impression they generated – that the Nazi terror machine
was everywhere. It very effectively scared most oppos ition into submission.
FOCUS TASK 9.11
How did the Nazis control Germany?
Summarise these two pages in a table with the following headings:
•  Organisation
•  Methods
•  Controlled by
•  Duties
•  How it helped Hitler make his position secure.
The Gestapo
•  The GESTAPO was the secret state police. It was commanded by
Reinhard Heydrich.
•  Gestapo agents had sweeping powers. They could arrest citizens
and send them to concentration camps without trial or even
explanation.
•  They were believed to have a network of ‘informers’ listening in on
people’s conversations.
•  It seems that the Gestapo was the organisation most feared by
ordinary citizens. However, recent research has shown that
Germans believed the Gestapo was much more powerful than it
actually was. As a result, ordinary Germans informed on each
other because they thought the Gestapo would find out anyway.
SOURCE 1

Gestapo officers making an arrest. It was probably staged as
propaganda to increase the fear of the Gestapo.
The SS
•  After virtually destroying the SA in 1934, the SS grew into a huge
organisation with many different responsibilities. It had 1 million
staff by 1944. It was led by Heinrich Himmler.
•  SS men were Aryans, very highly trained and totally loyal to Hitler.
•  Under Himmler, the SS had the main responsibility for crushing
opposition and carrying out Nazi racial policies.
•  There were three particularly important sub-divisions:
    •  The SD was the SS’s own internal security service. The SD
would investigate potential disloyalty within the armed forces
or politically sensitive cases (e.g. a crime committed by a
senior Nazi).
    •  The Death’s Head units were responsible for the
concentration camps and the transportation and murder of the
Jews.
    •  The Waffen-SS – armoured regiments that fought alongside
the regular army.
•  As its power grew, the SS set up its own courts. Around 200,000
Germans were sent to concentration camps by these courts.
SOURCE 2
SS guards after taking over the Berlin
broadcasting station in 1933.
FIGURE 3
Map showing the locations and types of SS
activities 1933–37.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe at least two methods of control
used by the Nazis.
•  Choose one method and make sure you can explain how it was
effective.
Concentration camps
•  Concentration camps were the Nazis’ ultimate sanction against
their own people.
•  The first camps were set up as soon as Hitler took power in 1933.
They were makeshift prisons in disused factories and
warehouses. Purpose-built camps were soon built, usually in
isolated rural areas.
•  Jews, socialists, communists, trade unionists, churchmen and
anyone else brave enough to criticise the Nazis ended up in these
camps. Historians estimate that around 1.3 million Germans spent
at least some time in a concentration camp between 1933 and
1939.
•  These camps were run by SS Death’s Head units.
•  Prisoners were forced to do hard labour. Food was limited and
prisoners suffered harsh discipline, beatings and random
executions.
•  The aim was to ‘correct’ opponents of the regime. However, by
the late 1930s, deaths in the camps were increasingly common
and very few people came out alive.
SOURCE 4
Political prisoners at the Oranienburg
concentration camp near Berlin.
The police and the courts
•  Top jobs in local police forces were given to high-ranking Nazis
reporting to Himmler.
•  As a result, the police added political ‘snooping’ to their normal
law-and-order role. They were, of course, under strict instructions
to ignore crimes committed by Nazi agents.
•  Similarly, the Nazis controlled magistrates, judges and the
courts. They appointed all the judges and sacked those they
disapproved of.
•  This led to self-imposed control – magistrates knew what they
were expected to do and did it. They knew they would not last
long if they did not. This meant that opponents of Nazism rarely
received a fair trial.
SOURCE 5
German judges swearing their loyalty to the
Nazi regime at the criminal courts in Berlin.
Source Analysis
1  Study Sources 1–5. Does it seem strange that these activities
were photographed by the Nazis?
2  Can you think why these pictures were published and why the
Nazis did not try to hide what was happening?
Propaganda in Nazi Germany
One reason why oppos ition to Hitler was so limited was the work of Dr
Joseph Goebbels, minister for enlightenment and propaganda. Goebbels
passionately believed in Hitler as the saviour of Germany. His mission was
to make sure that others believed this too. Throughout the twelve years of
Nazi rule Goebbels constantly kept his finger on the pulse of PUBLIC OPINION
and decided what the German public should and should not hear. He aimed to
use every resource available to him to make people loyal to Hitler and the
Nazis.
The Nuremberg rallies
Goebbels organised huge rallies, marches, torch-lit processions and
meetings. Probably the best example was the NUREMBERG RALLY which took
place in summer each year. There were bands, marches, flying displays and
Hitler’s brilliant speeches. The rallies brought some colour and excitement
into people’s lives. They gave them a sense of belonging to a great
movement. The rallies also showed the German people the pow er of the state
and convinced them that ‘every other German’ fully supported the Nazis.
Goebbels also recognised that one of the Nazis’ main attractions was that
they created order out of chaos and so the whole rally was organised to
emphasise order.
SOURCE 6
The annual rally at Nuremberg. The whole
town was taken over and the rally dominated
radio broadcasts and newsreels.
Source Analysis
Look at Source 6. How does the rally:
a)  make it clear who the leader is
b)  give people a sense of belonging
c)  provide colour and excitement
d)  show the power of the state
e)  show the Nazis’ ability to create order out of chaos?
Control of media and culture
Less spectacular than the rallies but possibly more important was Goebbels’
control of media and culture. The diagram oppos ite summarises how he used
them to spread Nazi messages. This was in stark contrast with the freedom of
expression allowed in Weimar Germany.
Goebbels was supported in this work by the terror state. For example, when
he wanted to close dow n an anti-Nazi newspaper, silence an anti-Nazi
writer, or catch someone listening to a foreign radio station, the SS and the
Gestapo w ere there to do t hat work for him.
Books
•  No books could be published without Goebbels’ permission. Not
surprisingly the bestseller in Nazi Germany was Hitler’s book,
Mein Kampf.
•  In 1933 Goebbels organised a high-profile ‘book-burning’. Nazi
students publicly burned books that included ideas unacceptable
to the Nazis.

Art
•  Artists suffered the same kinds of restriction as writers. Only
Nazi-approved painters could show their works.
•  These usually had to be paintings or sculptures of heroic-looking
Aryans, military figures or images of the ideal Aryan family.
Newspapers
•  Within months of the Nazi take-over, Jewish editors and
journalists found themselves out of work and anti-Nazi
newspapers were closed down.
•  Those that remained were not allowed to print anti-Nazi articles.
German newspapers became dull reading and Germans bought
fewer newspapers as a result – circulation fell by about 10 per
cent.

Cinema
•  All films – factual or fictional, thrillers or comedies – had to carry
a pro-Nazi message.
•  The newsreels before each feature film told of the greatness of
Hitler and the achievements of Nazi Germany. There is evidence
that Germans avoided these by arriving late!
•  Goebbels censored all foreign films coming into Germany.
Music
•  He banned JAZZ music, which had been popular in Germany as
elsewhere around Europe. He banned it because it was ‘Black’
music and black people were considered an inferior race.
Posters
•  If people missed the radio broadcasts they would see the
posters. Goebbels plastered Germany with posters proclaiming
the successes of Hitler and the Nazis and attacking their
opponents.

Radio
•  Goebbels also loved new technology and quickly saw the
potential of radio broadcasting for spreading the Nazi message.
•  He made cheap radios available so all Germans could buy one
(see Source 8 on page 270) and he controlled all the radio
stations. Listening to broadcasts from the BBC was punishable
by death.
•  Just in case people did not have a radio Goebbels placed
loudspeakers in the streets and public bars.
•  Hitler’s speeches and those of other Nazi leaders were repeated
on the radio over and over again until the ideas expressed in
them – German expansion into eastern Europe, the inferiority of
the Jews – came to be accepted as normal by the German
people.
SOURCE 7
There are cinema evenings to be caught up with, very enjoyable
ones – if only there were not each time the bitterness of the Third
Reich’s triumphalism. The renewal of German art … enthusiastic
welcome for the Führer in X or Y … Goebbels’ speech on culture
… the biggest lecture theatre in the world, the biggest autobahn in
the world, etc. etc. – the biggest lie in the world, the biggest
disgrace in the world. It can’t be helped.
From the diary of Victor Klemperer for 8
August 1937.
SOURCE 8
Poster advertising cheap Nazi-produced
radios. The text reads ‘All Germany hears the
Führer on the People’s Radio.’ The radios
had only a short range and were unable to
pick up foreign stations.
Source Analysis
What can you infer from Sources 7 and 8 about the effectiveness of
Nazi propaganda?
Think!
In groups, discuss which of the following statements you most
agree with.
A  Goebbels’ work was more important to Nazi success than that
of Himmler (head of the SS).
B  Himmler’s work was more important to Nazi success than
Goebbels’.
C  The techniques of repression and propaganda go hand in hand –
neither would work without the other.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe at least two things the Nazis banned
and one thing the Nazis promoted.
•  Be ready to explain why Goebbels thought the use of modern
technology was important.
FOCUS TASK 9.12
How did the Nazis use culture and the mass media to control
the people?
Use your own wider research to find out about one of the following
examples of Goebbels’ use of culture or mass media:
•  a book banned by the Nazis or an artwork banned by the Nazis
•  The Triumph of the Will: a propaganda film made by the Nazis
•  Heinrich Hoffman’s photographs of Hitler
•  Der Sturmer.
There are many other examples you can choose.
For your chosen example, research and then write a short
explanation of how this was used by the Nazis. It could be one or
more of:
•  marginalising groups the Nazis disliked
•  persuading Germans to believe in Nazi ideology
•  building national pride
•  strengthening the cult of personality around Hitler.
Case study: The 1936 Olympics
One of Goebbels’ greatest challenges came with the 1936 O lympic Games in
Berlin. Other Nazis were oppos ed to holding the Games in Berlin, but
Goebbels convinced Hitler that this was a great propaganda oppor tunity both
within Germany and internationally.
Goebbels and Hitler also thought that the Olympics could be a showcase for
their doctrine that the Aryan race was superior to all other races. However,
there was international pressure for nations such as the USA to BOYCOTT the
Games in protest against the Nazis’ repressive regime and anti-Jewish
politics. In response, the Nazis included one token Jew in their team!
Think!
1  In what ways was the Berlin Olympics a propaganda success
for Goebbels?
2  In what ways was it a failure?
3  Why do you think Nazi propaganda was more successful within
Germany than outside it?
4  You have already come across many examples of Nazi
propaganda. Choose one example which you think is the
cleverest piece of propaganda. Explain your choice.
Goebbels built a brand new stadium to hold 100,000 pe ople. It was lit by the
most modern electric lighting. He brought in television cameras for the first
time. The most sophisticated German photo-electronic timing device was
installed. The stadium had the largest stopclock ever built. With guests and
competitors from 49 c ountries coming into the heart of Nazi Germany, it was
going to take all Goebbels’ talents to show that Germany was a modern,
civilised and successful nation. No expense was spared. When the Games
opened, the visitors were duly amazed at the scale of the stadium, the
wonderful facilities and the efficiency of the organisation. However, they
were also struck, and in some cases appalled, by  the almost fanatical
devotion of the people to Hitler and by the overt presence of army and SS
soldiers who were patrolling or standing guard everywhere.
To the delight of Hitler and Goebbels, Germany came top of  the medal table,
way ahead of all other countries. However, to their great dismay, a black
athlete, Jesse Owens, became the star of the Games. He won four gold
medals and broke eleven world records in the process. The ten black
members of the American team won thirteen medals between them. So much
for Aryan superiority!
To the majority of German people, who had grown used to the Nazi
propaganda machine, the Games appeared to present all the qualities they
valued in the Nazis – a grand vision, efficiency, pow er, strength and
achievement. However, to many foreign visitors who were not used to such
blatant propaganda it backfired on the Nazi regime.
Revision Tip
•  Try to remember two ways the Nazis exploited the 1936
Olympics.
•  Explain one way in which the Olympics were a propaganda
success for the Nazis and one way they were a failure.
SOURCE 9
The stadium built for the 1936 Olympics.
The Nazis and the Churches
The relationship between the Churches and the Nazis was complicated. In the
early stages of the Nazi regime, there was some CO-OPERATION between the
Nazis and the Churches. Hitler signed a Concordat with the Catholic Church
in 1933. This meant that Hitler agreed to leave the Catholic Church alone and
allowed it to keep control of its schools. In return, the Church agreed to stay
out of politics.
Hitler tried to get all of the Protestant Churches to come together in one
official Reich Church. The Reich Church was headed by the Protestant
Bishop Ludwig Müller. However, many Germans still felt that their true
loyalties lay with their original Churches in their local areas rather than with
this state-approved Church.
Hitler even encouraged an alternative religion to the Churches, the pagan
German Faith Movement (see Source 11).
Many churchgoers either supported the Nazis or did little to oppos e them.
However, there were some very important exceptions. The Catholic Bishop
Galen criticised the Nazis throughout the 1930s . In 1941 h e led a popu lar
protest against the Nazi policies of killing mentally ill and physically
disabled people, forcing the Nazis temporarily to stop. He had such strong
support among his followers that the Nazis decided it was too risky to try to
silence him because they did not want trouble while Germany was at war.
Protestant ministers also resisted the Nazis. Pastor Martin Niemöller was
one of the most high-profile critics of the regime in the 1930s . Along with
Dietrich Bonhoeffer, he formed an alternative Protestant Church to the
official Reich Church. These church leaders suffered a similar fate to
Hitler’s political oppon ents. Niemöller spent the years 1938–45 i n a
concentration camp for resisting the Nazis. Dietrich Bonhoeffer preached
against the Nazis until the Gestapo stoppe d him in 1937.
SOURCE 10
Most postwar accounts have concentrated on the few German
clerics who did behave bravely … But these were few. Most
German church leaders were shamefully silent. As late as January
1945, the Catholic bishop of Würzburg was urging his flock to fight
on for the Fatherland, saying that ‘salvation lies in sacrifice’.
British historian and journalist Charles
Wheeler, writing in 1996.
SOURCE 11
An official photograph of the National Synod
(the ruling body) of the German Evangelical
Church (the largest of Germany’s Protestant
churches) in 1933. The man in the centre is
Bishop Ludwig Mueller, a close ally of Hitler.
Hitler forced the Church to accept him as its
leader in 1933.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe:
•  one example of collaboration between the Nazis and the
Churches
•  at least one example of conflict between the Nazis and the
Churches.
The persecution of minorities
Through their twelve years in pow er the Nazis persecuted any group that they
thought challenged Nazi ideals. Homosexuals were seen as a threat to Nazi
ideas about family life; the mentally handicapped were a threat to Nazi ideas
about Germans being a perfect master race; gypsies and Jews were thought to
be inferior people.
Methods of persecution varied.
•  Organisations for gay and lesbian people were shut dow n. Homosexuality
was already a crime and there was a lot of antigay prejudice even before
1933 s o the Nazis exploited this prejudice. Books by gay authors were
banned. Around 100,000 g ay people were arrested with around 50,000
sent to prison. Figures are unclear but between 5000 a nd 10,000 of  these
ended up in concentration camps. They were forced to wear a pink triangle
to mark them out.
•  A so-called ‘euthanasia programme’ was begun in 1939 a gainst the
mentally handicapped: at least 5000 ba bies and children were killed
between 1939 a nd 1945 e ither by injection or by starvation. Between 1939
and 1941, 72,000 m entally ill patients were gassed before a public outcry
in Germany itself ended the extermination.
•  The attempted extermination of the gypsies, on the other hand, did not
cause an outcry. Five out of six gypsies living in Germany in 1939 w ere
killed by the Nazis.
•  Similarly, there was little or no complaint about the treatment of so-called
‘asocials’ – alcoholics, the homeless, prostitutes, habitual criminals and
beggars – who were rounded up off the streets and sent to concentration
camps.
FOCUS TASK 9.13
Why did the Nazis persecute so many groups in Germany?
You have seen how the Nazis persecuted people who opposed
them politically, e.g. the Communists, socialists and trade unionists.
But why did they persecute so many other groups?
Complete a table as follows.
•  In the first column, list the groups mentioned in this section.
•  In the second column, explain why these groups were targeted.
•  In the third column, note Nazi actions towards them and what
happened to them.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe how the Nazis persecuted the Jews
and one other group. It is important to be able to explain Nazi
theories on race and how these led to persecution.
The Jews
The most vicious persecution was the Nazi treatment of the Jewish
popu lation in which ANTI-SEMITISM culminated in the dreadful slaughter of
the ‘FINAL SOLUTION’.
Hitler’s anti-Semitism
Anti-Semitism means hatred of Jews. Throughout Europe, Jews had
experienced discrimination for hundreds of years. They were often treated
unjustly in courts or forced to live in ghettos. One reason for this persecution
was religious, in that Jews were blamed for the death of Jesus Christ.
Another reason was that they tended to be well educated and therefore held
well-paid professional jobs or ran successful stores and businesses.
Hitler hated Jews insanely. In his years of pove rty in Vienna, he became
obsessed by the fact that Jews ran many of the most successful businesses,
particularly the large department stores. This offended his idea of the
superiority of Aryans. Hitler also blamed Jewish businessmen and bankers
for Germany’s defeat in the First World War. He thought they had forced the
surrender of the German army.
SOURCE 12
To read the pages [of Hitler’s Mein Kampf] is to enter a world of the
insane, a world peopled by hideous and distorted shadows. The
Jew is no longer a human being, he has become a mythical figure,
a grimacing leering devil invested with infernal powers, the
incarnation of evil.
A. Bullock, Hitler: A Study in Tyranny,
published in 1990.
Early measures against the Jews
As soon as Hitler took pow er in 1933 h e began to mobilise the full pow ers
of the state against the Jews.
•  They were immediately banned from the Civil Service and a variety of
public services such as broadcasting and teaching.
•  At the same time, SA and later SS troope rs organised boycotts of Jewish
shops and businesses (see Source 13), which were marked with a star of
David.
•  In 1935 t he NUREMBERG LAWS took away German citizenship from Jews.
Jews were also forbidden to marry or have sex with pure-bloode d
Germans.
•  Goebbels’ propagan da experts bom barded German children and families
with anti-Jewish messages.
•  In daily life Jews faced discrimination. They might be refused jobs or
refused service in shops. In schools, Jewish children were humiliated and
then segregated.
SOURCE 13
SA and SS men enforcing the boycott of
Jewish shops, April 1933.
SOURCE 14
I hate the treatment of the Jews. I think it is a bad side of the
movement and I will have nothing to do with it. I did not join the
party to do that sort of thing. I joined the party because I thought
and still think that Hitler did the greatest Christian work for twenty-
five years. I saw seven million men rotting in the streets, often I
was there too, and no one … seemed to care … Then Hitler came
and he took all those men off the streets and gave them health and
security and work.
H. Schmidt, Labour Corps leader, in an
interview in 1938.
Kristallnacht
In November 1938 a  young Jew killed a German diplomat in Paris. The
Nazis used this as an excuse to launch a violent revenge on Jews. Plain-
clothes SS troope rs were issued with pickaxes and hammers and the
addresses of Jewish businesses. They ran riot, smashing up Jewish shops and
workplaces. Ninety-one Jews were murdered. Hundreds of synagogues were
burned. Twenty thousand Jews were taken to concentration camps.
Thousands more left the country. This event became known as KRISTALLNACHT or
‘The Night of Broken Glass’. Many Germans watched the events of
Kristallnacht with alarm and concern. The Nazi-controlled press presented
Kristallnacht as the spontaneous reaction of ordinary Germans against the
Jews. Most Germans did not believe this. However, hardly anyone protested.
The few who did were brutally murdered.
SOURCE 15
I feel the urge to present to you a true report of the recent riots,
plundering and destruction of Jewish property. Despite what the
official Nazi account says, the German people have nothing
whatever to do with these riots and burnings. The police supplied
SS men with axes, house-breaking tools and ladders. A list of the
addresses of all Jewish shops and flats was provided and the mob
worked under the leadership of the SS men. The police had strict
orders to remain neutral.
Anonymous letter from a German civil servant
to the British consul, 1938.
SOURCE 16
Until Kristallnacht, many Germans believed Hitler was not engaged
in mass murder. [The treatment of the Jews] seemed to be a minor
form of harassment of a disliked minority. But after Kristallnacht no
German could any longer be under any illusion. I believe it was the
day that we lost our innocence. But it would be fair to point out that
I myself never met even the most fanatic Nazi who wanted the
extermination [mass murder] of the Jews. Certainly we wanted the
Jews out of Germany, but we did not want them to be killed.
Alfons Heck, member of the Hitler Youth in
1938, interviewed for a television programme
in 1989.
SOURCE 17
[The day after Kristallnacht] the teachers told us: don’t worry about
what you see, even if you see some nasty things which you may
not understand. Hitler wants a better Germany, a clean Germany.
Don’t worry, everything will work out fine in the end.
Henrik Metelmann, member of the Hitler
Youth, in 1938.
Source Analysis
1  Read Sources 14–17. How useful is each source to a historian
looking at the German reaction to Kristallnacht?
2  Taken together, do they provide a clear picture of how Germans
felt about Kristallnacht?
Revision Tip
It is important that you can describe how persecution of the Jews
increased in the 1930s. Make sure you can:
•  describe the 1933 boycott, the Nuremberg Laws and
Kristallnacht
•  explain how each was more severe than the one before it.
Think!
Could Germans have protested effectively about Kristallnacht?
Explain your answer with reference to pages 273–275.
SOURCE 18
A cartoon from the Nazi newspaper Der
Stürmer, 1935. Jews owned many shops and
businesses. These were a constant target for
Nazi attacks.
Opposition to Nazi rule, 1933–39
The Nazis achieved a remarkable level of control over ordinary Germans.
Through their mix of ruthless violence and constant propaganda they forced
people to do w hat they wanted. Not all Germans became Nazis, but most kept
their fears or oppos ition to themselves because they felt pow erless or
unwilling to risk their lives by saying or doing unacceptable things. Even the
persecution of minorities, which nowadays seems so horrific, faced little
oppos ition.
However, some Germans did find their own ways to oppos e the Nazis.
Political opposition
The Nazis had not killed or imprisoned all the socialists. Some socialists did
still meet secretly, but they had lost their leaders and were divided from each
other so their activities were small scale. There were no attempts to
challenge or topple the Nazi regime until well into the Second World War.
However, in the 1930s  there was some sabotage of factories, railways and
army stores. The Gestapo claimed to have broken up 1000 oppos ition
meetings in 1936 ( probably many more took place). They record having
seized 1.6 m illion anti-Nazi leaflets in 1936 a lone. You could conclude from
this either that the political oppos ition were still active (that is a lot of
leaflets!) or that it was pow erless (what good w as a leaflet against the
barrage of Nazi propaganda?)
SOURCE 19
Frustration and disappointment with the realities of everyday life
under Nazism led ordinary Germans to grumble and complain, but
seldom to engage in behaviour that can be appropriately termed
‘resistance’. Why? Organised terror played a central role. But the
most important mechanism of social integration was Hitler’s
charismatic leadership. The ‘Hitler Myth’ secured loyalty to the
regime of even those who opposed the Nazi movement itself.
Millions of Germans believed the Fuhrer would right all wrongs in
Germany if only the abuses could be brought to his attention.
Hitler’s foreign policy and military successes also convinced
ordinary Germans (at least until Stalingrad) that the Fuhrer was a
brilliant, infallible statesman and general who was leading
Germany to world power.
From The Hitler Myth by Ian Kershaw,
published in 2001.
Social opposition
Social oppos ition means people or groups who tried to keep their own
identity or refused to accept and conform to Nazi ideals. This was much
more common than political oppos ition. Historians have identified many
examples of this, particularly once the novelty of the Nazis had worn off and
the nature of their rule was clearer to ordinary Germans.
There was widespread apathy towards parades and propaganda, particularly
after 1936. For example:
•  local party officials reported that they increasingly had to bully people to
attend Nazi rallies
•  the Nazis had to use ‘radio wardens’ to force people to listen to Hitler’s
speeches.
The Gestapo reported a lot of complaining in bars, trains and other public
places. They reported that some people refused to give the Heil Hitler salute,
others told jokes about Hitler and the Nazis or refused to contribute to party
funds.
Some national Church leaders publicly criticised the Nazis. At the local
level some resisted, for example Joseph Fath was reported for hanging his
own flags in his church instead of Nazi flags, and Pastor Grueber risked his
life protecting Jews and helping them to escape the Nazis.
We have little idea of how typical these examples are because Nazi
oppon ents left little evidence – they tried to cover their tracks – so even this
information comes via the Nazis’ own records, which obvi ously have to be
handled carefully. However, the picture that emerges is that non-co-operation
was quite common and private grumbling about the Nazis was probably very
widespread. Indeed, on e Gestapo report commented disapprovingly that
grumbling had become a national pastime. While the Nazis may have
silenced oppos ition they had not won the ‘hearts and minds’ of the German
people. In the next chapter (9.4) you will examine this in more detail.
FOCUS TASK 9.14
How much opposition was there to the Nazi regime, 1933–39?
As Source 19 makes clear, there was very little opposition to the
Nazis between 1933 and 1939. The interesting thing however is to
compare these ‘peacetime’ years with the war years. So this task
provides a baseline.
Take these examples from the text and rate them by degree of
threat to the Nazi regime. Use a scale of 0–10 (0 means no impact
at all on the Nazis; 10 means it would topple the regime).
•  Meeting secretly
•  Sabotaging factories or railways
•  Distributing anti-Nazi leaflets
•  Not listening to Nazi radio broadcast
•  Not giving the Heil Hitler salute
•  Hanging your own flags in church instead of Nazi flags
•  Helping Jews escape from Germany
•  Grumbling about the Nazis
•  Telling jokes about Hitler
Key Question Summary
How effectively did the Nazis control Germany, 1933–39?
1  The Nazis had a powerful range of organisations to control
Germany: the SS, the Gestapo, the police and the courts, and
concentration camps.
2  There was little opposition because of the terror they inspired,
economic progress and success in foreign affairs, overturning the
Treaty of Versailles and making Germany a strong military
power.
3  The Nazis built a highly successful propaganda machine and used
mass media to control what people knew.
4  They sought to control culture, banning books which contained
ideas they did not like. Paintings, plays and films had to put
across a pro-Nazi message and show idealised images of the
Aryan family.
5  The Nazis persecuted many groups that did not fit with their
notions of racial purity, such as disabled people, homosexuals
and gypsies.
6  They particularly persecuted the Jews, depriving them of their
jobs, businesses and homes and forcing them into ghettos.
FOCUS TASK 9.15
Review: How effectively did the Nazis control Germany, 1933–
39?
The table below lists various groups in Germany who the Nazis
tried to control. Look back over pages 264–276 and gather
examples of how they did this. Write that in column 2. In column 3
give the Nazis a score out of 5 for effectiveness (5 would be total
control). In column 4 explain your score using evidence.
You can add three further rows to this table for young people,
women and workers as you study Chapter 9D.
9D What was it like to live in Nazi
Germany?
Young people in Nazi Germany
The Nazis reorganised every aspect of life to win children’s loyalty and to
shape their ideas.
At school
If you had been a sixteen-year-old Aryan living in Nazi Germany
you would probably have been a strong supporter of Adolf Hitler. At
school your teacher would probably be an approved teacher who
had been on a training course run by the National Socialist
Teachers Alliance. At school you would learn about the history of
Germany. You would be outraged to find out how the German army
was ‘stabbed in the back’ by the weak politicians who had made
peace. You might well remember the hardships of the 1920s for
yourself, but at school you would be told how these were caused
by Jews squeezing profits out of honest Germans. By the time you
were a senior pupil, your studies in history would make you
confident that loyalty to the Führer was right and good. Your
biology lessons would inform you that you are special as a member
of the Aryan race that is superior in intelligence and strength to the
Untermenschen or sub-human Jews and Slavs of eastern Europe.
In maths you would be set questions like the one in Source 2. You
would not be expecting to go to university. Between 1933 and 1938
the number of university places fell from 128,000 to just 58,000.
FOCUS
You have seen how Hitler and the Nazis tried to control Germany.
You have also seen how they persecuted groups they saw as
‘outsiders’. In this section you will examine the effect of Nazi rule on
the majority of Germans. Hitler wanted to create a
Volksgemeinschaft – a NATIONAL COMMUNITY of Germans. This meant
young people, women, workers, farmers, businesspeople. But did
this vision become a reality? In this section you will examine the
experiences of these different groups.
Focus Points
•  How did young people react to the Nazi regime?
•  How successful were Nazi policies towards women and the
family?
•  Did most people in Germany benefit from Nazi rule?
•  How did the coming of war change life in Nazi Germany?
SOURCE 1
It is my great educative work I am beginning with the young. We
older ones are used up … We are bearing the burden of a
humiliating past … But my magnificent youngsters! Are there finer
ones in the world? Look at these young men and boys! What
material! With them I can make a new world.
Hitler, speaking in 1939.
SOURCE 2
The Jews are aliens in Germany. In 1933 there were 66,060,000
inhabitants of the German Reich of whom 499,862 were Jews.
What is the percentage of aliens in Germany?
A question from a Nazi maths textbook, 1933.
SOURCE 3
All subjects – German language, History, Geography, Chemistry
and Mathematics – must concentrate on military subjects, the
glorification of military service and of German heroes and leaders
and the strength of a rebuilt Germany. Chemistry will develop a
knowledge of chemical warfare, explosives, etc, while Mathematics
will help the young to understand artillery, calculations, ballistics.
A German newspaper, heavily controlled by
the Nazis, approves of the curriculum in 1939.
SOURCE 4
8.00German (every day)
8.50Geography, History or Singing (alternate days)
9.40Race Studies and Ideology (every day)
10.25Recess, Sports and Special Announcements (every day)
11.00Domestic Science or Maths (alternate days)
12.10Eugenics or Health Biology (alternate days)
1.00–
6.00Sport
EveningsSex education, Ideology or Domestic Science (one
evening each)
The daily timetable for a girls’ school in Nazi
Germany
Think!
1  Do you think the real aim of the question in Source 2 is to
improve mathematical skills?
2  Read Source 4. Eugenics is the study of how to produce perfect
offspring by choosing parents with ideal qualities. How would
this help the Nazis?
In the Hitler Youth
Outside school your indoctrination continued. If you were a boy you
would probably have been in the German Young People
(Deutsches Jungvolk) from the age of ten to fourteen. Girls had
similar organisations called the League of German Girls. Then you
would have moved on to the Hitler Youth (for boys) or the LEAGUE
OF GERMAN MAIDENS (for girls). You would have marched in exciting
parades with loud bands. You would probably be physically fit. Your
leisure time would also be devoted to Hitler and the Nazis. You
would be a strong cross-country runner, and confident at reading
maps. After years of summer camps, you would be comfortable
camping out of doors and if you were a boy you would know how
to clean a rifle and keep it in good condition. If you were a girl you
would be taught sewing, cooking and other domestic tasks. You
would also be taught about race and how to be a good German
mother.
You would be attracted to the Nazi youth movements by the leisure
opportunities they offered. There were really no alternatives. All
other youth organisations had been absorbed or made illegal. By
1936 the Hitler Youth had around 6 million members. However, if
you did not join this would have been looked on with surprise and
suspicion. When it was time to apply for an apprenticeship or a job
one of the first things an employer will ask will be whether you had
been in the Hitler Youth.
SOURCE 5
It was a great feeling. You felt you belonged to a great nation
again. Germany was in safe hands and I was going to help to build
a strong Germany. But my father of course felt differently about it.
[He warned] ‘Now Henrik, don’t say to them what I am saying to
you.’ I always argued with my father as I was very much in favour
of the Hitler regime which was against his background as a working
man.
Henrik Metelmann describes what it was like
being a member of the Hitler Youth in the
1930s.
SOURCE 6
Hitler looked over the stand, and I know he looked into my eyes,
and he said: ‘You my boys are the standard bearers, you will inherit
what we have created.’ From that moment there was not any doubt
I was bound to Adolf Hitler until long after our defeat. Afterwards I
told my friends how Hitler had looked into my eyes, but they all
said: ‘No! It was my eyes he was looking into.’
A young German describes his feelings after
a Hitler Youth rally.
SOURCE 7
Members of the Hitler Youth in the 1930s.
From a very early age children were
encouraged to join the Nazi youth
organisations. It was not compulsory, but
most young people did join.
SOURCE 8
Children have been deliberately taken away from parents who
refused to acknowledge their belief in National Socialism … The
refusal of parents to allow their young children to join the youth
organisation is regarded as an adequate reason for taking the
children away.
A German teacher writing in 1938.
At home
As a child in Nazi Germany, you might well feel slightly alienated
(estranged) from your parents because they are not as keen on the
Nazis as you are. They expect your first loyalty to be to your family,
whereas your Hitler Youth leader makes it clear that your first
loyalty is to Adolf Hitler. You find it hard to understand why your
father grumbles about Nazi regulation of his working practices –
surely the Führer (Hitler) is protecting him? Your parents find the
idea of Nazi inspectors checking up on the teachers rather strange.
For you it is normal.
SOURCE 9
Early one morning, a neighbour of ours, a trade-union secretary,
was taken away in a car by the SS and police. His wife had great
difficulty finding out what had happened to him. My mother was too
scared to be seen talking to her and Father became very quiet and
alarmed and begged me not to repeat what he had said within our
four walls about the whole Nazi set-up …
I loved it when we went on our frequent marches, feeling important
when the police had to stop the traffic to give us right of way and
passing pedestrians had to raise their arm in the Nazi salute.
Whenever we were led out on a march, it was always into the
working-class quarters. We were told that this was to remind the
workers, but I sometimes wondered what we wanted to remind
them of, after all most of our fathers were workers.
From Through Hell for Hitler, the memoirs of
Henrik Metelmann, published in 1970.
Metelmann came from a working-class
family.
SOURCE 10
Illustration from a Nazi children’s book. The
children are being taught to distrust Jews.
The whole story?
The previous three text panels probably gave you the impression that the
Nazis really did control the hearts and minds of young people. However, this
might not be the whole story. We know from interviews with Hitler Youth
members after the war that while many of them enjoyed the activities they
tended to switch off when lectured about Nazi ideas. We have reports from
anti-Nazi spies that by 1938 m any Hitler Youth members saw the
organisation as boring, although we have to take care with evidence like this.
We also know that despite all the lectures on health, diseases like diphtheria
and scarlet fever increased in the 1930s . We also know that juvenile crime
rose during the 1930s  and 175,000 y oung people were convicted of crimes in
1939 a lone. Juvenile crime increased dramatically once war began, and so
did youth resistance. Find out more about this on page 288.
SOURCE 11
We didn’t know much about Nazi ideals. Nevertheless, we were
politically programmed: to obey orders, to cultivate the soldierly
virtue of standing to attention and saying ‘Yes, Sir’ and to stop
thinking when the word Fatherland was uttered and Germany’s
honour and greatness were mentioned.
A former member of the Hitler Youth looks
back after the war.
Think!
1  Make a list of the main differences between your life and the life
of a sixteen-year-old in Nazi Germany.
2  Totalitarian regimes throughout history have used children as a
way of influencing parents. Why do you think they do this?
3  Read Source 5. Why do you think Henrik’s father asks Henrik not
to repeat what he says to him?
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe:
    •  at least one way the Nazis tried to control young people
    •  at least two ways the Nazis tried to win over young people.
•  Record two points which show that Nazi youth policies
succeeded and two points which show they failed.
FOCUS TASK 9.16
How did young people react to the Nazi regime?
1  Young people were among the most fanatical supporters of the
Nazi regime. Use pages 278–280 to write three paragraphs to
explain why the Nazis were successful in winning them over.
Include the following points:
    •  why the Nazis wanted to control young people
    •  how they set about doing it
    •  what the attractions of the youth movements were.
2  The Nazi regime was not successful in keeping the loyalty of all
young people. Add a fourth paragraph to your essay to explain
why some young people rejected the Nazi youth movements.
Women in Nazi Germany
SOURCE 12
A painting showing the Nazis’ view of an ideal
German family.
Source Analysis
What does Source 12 reveal about the Nazis’ view of women?
Nazi attitudes to women
Hitler and most Nazis had a very traditional view of the role of the German
woman as wife and mother. Many German men and women agreed. In the
traditional rural areas and small towns, many women felt that the proper role
of a woman was to support her husband. There was also resentment towards
working women in the early 1930s , since they were seen as keeping men out
of jobs. It all created a lot of pressure on women to conform to traditional
roles.
There were some prominent women in Nazi Germany. Leni Riefenstahl was a
high-profile film producer. Gertrude Scholz-Klink was head of the Nazi
Women’s Bureau, although she was excluded from any important discussions
(such as the one to conscript female labour in 1942) . Many working-class
girls and women gained the oppor tunity to travel and meet new people
through the Nazi women’s organisation. Overall, however, oppor tunities for
women were limited. Married professional women were forced to give up
their jobs and discrimination against women applicants for jobs was
encouraged.
Rewards for mothers
The Nazis offered tempting financial incentives for married couples to have
at least four children. Mothers got a ‘Gold Cross’ for having eight children.
Posters, radio broadcasts and newsreels all celebrated the ideas of
motherhood a nd homebuilding. The German Maidens’ League reinforced
these ideas, focusing on a combination of good ph ysical health and
housekeeping skills. This was reinforced at school. With all these
encouragements the birth rate did increase from fifteen per thousand in 1933
to twenty per thousand in 1939. There was also an increase in pregnancies
outside marriage. These girls were looked after in state maternity hostels.
Revision Tip
•  You need to be able to describe at least two aspects of Nazi
policy towards women.
•  Make sure you can explain why the Nazis wanted women out of
the workplace.
•  Find two points you could use as evidence in an essay to argue
that Nazi policies on women were successful.
SOURCE 13
A German woman and her Jewish boyfriend
being publicly humiliated by the SA in 1933.
The notices say: (woman) ‘I’m the biggest pig
in town and only get involved with Jews’;
(man) ‘As a Jewish boy I always take only
German girls up to my room’.
The impact of war
In the late 1930s  the Nazis had to do a n about-turn as they suddenly needed
more women workers. Many women had to struggle with both family and
work responsibilities. However, even during the crisis years of 1942–45
when German industry was struggling to cope with the demand for war
supplies, Nazi policy on women was still torn between their traditional
stereotype of the mother, and the actual needs of the workplace.
SOURCE 14
I went to Sauckel [the Nazi minister in charge of labour] with the
proposition that we should recruit our labour from the ranks of
German women. He replied brusquely that where to obtain which
workers was his business. Moreover, he said, as Gauleiter [a
regional governor] he was Hitler’s subordinate and responsible to
the Führer alone … Sauckel offered to put the question to Goering
as Commissioner of the Four-Year Plan … but I was scarcely
allowed to advance my arguments. Sauckel and Goering
continually interrupted me. Sauckel laid great weight on the danger
that factory work might inflict moral harm on German womanhood;
not only might their ‘psychic and emotional life’ be affected but also
their ability to bear children.
Goering totally concurred. But just to be absolutely sure, Sauckel
went immediately to Hitler and had him confirm the decision. All
my good arguments were therefore blown to the winds.
Albert Speer, Inside The Third Reich, 1970.
Speer was minister of armaments and war
production.
FOCUS TASK 9.17
How successful were Nazi policies for women?
Read these two statements:
For each statement explain whether you agree or disagree with it
and use examples from the text to support your explanation.
Workers, farmers and businesses in
Nazi Germany
Economic recovery and rearmament
Hitler came to pow er because of economic crisis in Germany. He demanded
total pow er and in return he promised to get Germany back to work. Did he
deliver?
Hitler was fortunate in that by 1933 t he worst of the Depression was over.
Even so, there is no dou bt that the Nazis acted with energy and commitment
to solve some of the main problems. The brilliant economist Dr Hjalmar
Schacht organised Germany’s finances to fund a huge programme of work
creation. The National Labour Service sent men on public works projects, in
particular to build a network of motorways, or AUTOBAHNS, and railways.
There were major house-building programmes and grandiose new public
building projects such as the Reich Chancellery in Berlin. Job creation was
almost entirely funded by the state rather than from German businesses.
Despite this, unemployment fell steadily and Germany was actually running
short of workers by 1939.
Other measures brought increasing prosperity. One of Hitler’s most cherished
plans was rearmament. In 1935 h e reintroduced conscription for the
German army. In 1936 h e announced a Four-Year Plan under the control of
Goering to get the German economy ready for war.
Conscription reduced unemployment. The need for weapons, equipment and
uniforms created jobs in the coal mines, steel and textile mills. Engineers and
designers gained new oppor tunities, particularly when Hitler decreed that
Germany would have a world-class air force (the Luftwaffe).
Think!
As you read through pages 283–285, you will come across a
number of individuals, organisations and terms in bold type in the
text, like this. You could add more of your own if you wish. Draw
up a table containing definitions of the words, or explanations of
their importance to the Nazi’s economic policies. The completed
table will help you with your revision. You could organise your table
like this:
Key word/term/person Definition/explanation
  
SOURCE 15
Previously unemployed men assemble for the
building of the first autobahn, September
1933.
The Nazis and the workers
Hitler promised (and delivered) lower unemployment which helped to
ensure popu larity among industrial workers. These workers were important
to the Nazis: Hitler needed good w orkers to create the industries that would
help to make Germany great. The Nazis never really won the hearts of the
workers but they did provide a range of benefits which kept most workers
reasonably happy.
•  Schemes such as STRENGTH THROUGH JOY (KDF) gave them cheap theatre
and cinema tickets, organised courses, trips and sports events.
•  Many thousands of workers saved five marks a week in the state scheme to
buy the Volkswagen Beetle, the ‘people’s car’. It became a symbol of the
prosperous new Germany, even though no workers ever received a car
because all car production was halted by the war in 1939.
•  Another important scheme was the BEAUTY OF LABOUR movement. This
improved working conditions in factories. It introduced features not seen
in many workplaces before, such as washing facilities and low-cost
canteens.
FIGURE 16
Unemployment and government expenditure
in Germany, 1932–38.
What was the price of these advances? Workers lost their main political
party, the SDP. They lost their trade unions and for many workers this
remained a source of bitter resentment. All workers had to join the DAF
(General Labour Front) run by Dr Robert Ley. This organisation kept
strict control of workers. They could not strike for better pay and conditions.
In some areas, they were prevented from moving to better-paid jobs. Wages
remained comparatively low, although prices were also strictly controlled.
Even so, by  the late 1930s , many workers were grumbling that their standard
of living was still lower than it had been before the Depression (see Figure
16).
The Nazis and the farming communities
The farmers had been an important factor in the Nazis’ rise to pow er. Hitler
introduced a series of measures to help them. In September 1933 h e
introduced the Reich Food Estate under Richard Darre. This set up central
boards to buy agricultural produce from the farmers and distribute it to
markets across Germany. It gave the peasant farmers a guaranteed market for
their goods  at guaranteed prices. The second main measure was the Reich
Entailed Farm Law: banks could not seize their land if they could not pay
loans or mortgages. This ensured that peasants’ farms stayed in their hands.
The Reich Entailed Farm Law also had a racial aim. Part of the Nazi
philosophy was ‘Blood and Soil’, the belief that the peasant farmers were the
basis of Germany’s master race. They would be the backbone of the new
German empire in the east. As a result, their way of life had to be protected.
As Source 18 shows, the measures were widely appreciated.
However, some peasants were not thrilled with the regime’s measures. More
efficient, go-ahead farmers were held back by having to work through the
same processes as less efficient farmers. The Reich Entailed Farm Law
stated that only the eldest child inherited the farm. As a result, many children
of farmers left the land to work for better pay in Germany’s industries. Rural
depopulation ran at about 3 pe r cent per year in the 1930s  – the exact
oppos ite of the Nazis’ aims!
FIGURE 17
Annual food consumption in working-class
families, 1927–37 (% change).
Big business and the middle classes
The record of the Nazis with the middle classes was also mixed. Certainly
many middle-class business people were grateful to the Nazis for eliminating
the Communist threat to their businesses and properties. They also liked the
way in which the Nazis seemed to be bringing order to Germany. For the
owners of small businesses it was a mixed picture. If you owned a small
engineering firm, you were likely to do w ell from government orders as
rearmament spending grew in the 1930s . However, if you produced consumer
goods  or ran a small shop, y ou might well struggle. Despite Hitler’s
promises, the large department stores which were taking business away from
local shops were not closed.
It was big business that really benefited from Nazi rule. The big companies
no longer had to worry about troublesome trade unions and strikes.
Companies such as the chemicals giant IG Farben gained huge government
contracts to make explosives, fertilisers and even artificial oil from coal.
Other household names today, such as Mercedes and Volkswagen, prospered
from Nazi policies.
SOURCE 18
Thousands of people came from all over Germany to the Harvest
Festival celebrations … We all felt the same happiness and joy.
Harvest festival was the thank you for us farmers having a future
again. I believe no statesman has ever been as well loved as Adolf
Hitler was at that time.
Lusse Essig’s memories of the 1930s. Lusse
was a farm worker who later worked for the
Agriculture Ministry.
‘National community’: Volksgemeinschaft
We have divided this section by social group, bu t the Nazis would not want
Germans to see their society that way. Hitler wanted all Germans (or more
exactly all ‘racially pure’ Germans) to think of themselves as part of a
national community, or Volksgemeinschaft. Under Nazi rule, workers,
farmers and so on would no longer see themselves primarily as workers or
farmers; they would see themselves as Germans. Their first loyalty would not
be to their own social group but to Germany and the Führer. They would be
so proud to belong to a great nation that was racially and culturally superior
to other nations that they would put the interests of Germany before their
own. Hitler’s policies towards each group were designed to help win this
kind of loyalty to the Nazi state.
The evidence suggests that the Nazis never quite succeeded in this: Germans
in the 1930s  certainly did not lose their self-interest, nor did they embrace
the national community wholeheartedly. However, the Nazis did not totally
fail either! In the 1930s  Germans did have a strong sense of national pride
and loyalty towards Hitler. For the majority of Germans, the benefits of Nazi
rule made them willing – on  the surface at least – to accept some central
control in the interests of making Germany great again.
Revision Tip
Look back at pages 283–285. There is a lot here and it might help
you to get right down to basics, so make sure you can describe:
•  two ways in which the Nazis helped tackle the problem of
unemployment
•  two ways the Nazis tried to improve life for workers
•  one way the Nazis tried to improve life for farmers
•  one reason each why the middle classes and big business might
have approved of the Nazis.
FOCUS TASK 9.18
Did most people in Germany benefit from Nazi rule?
Here are some claims that the Nazi propaganda machine made
about how life in Germany had been changed for the better during
the 1930s:
•  ‘Germans now have economic security.’
•  ‘Germans no longer need to feel inferior to other states. They
can be proud of their country.’
•  ‘The Nazi state looks after its workers very well indeed.’
•  ‘The Nazis have ensured that Germany is racially pure.’
•  ‘The Nazis are on the side of the farmers and have rescued
Germany’s farmers from disaster.’
•  ‘The Nazis have made Germany safe from communism.’
You are now going to decide how truthful these claims actually are.
1  Look back over pages 264–285. Gather evidence that supports
or opposes each claim. You could work in groups, taking one
claim each.
2  For each claim, decide whether, overall, it is totally untrue; a little
bit true; mostly true; or totally true.
3  Discuss:
    a)  Which of the groups you have studied do you think benefited
most from Nazi rule?
    b)  Who did not benefit from Nazi rule, and why not?
FOCUS TASK 9.19
How did the Nazis try to create a national community?
1  On pages 278–285 you have seen how the Nazis tried to win
over various groups in German society. Use the table below to
record the ways they did this and how far you think they
succeeded.
2  Nazi methods of control have been compared to a ‘carrot and
stick’ approach. You offer carrots (or anything nice to eat!) to
get a donkey to work for you but you use the stick to beat them
in case they don’t. For each of the groups above explain whether
you think the stick or the carrot was more important in
maintaining Nazi control and persuading each to play their part in
the national community.
The impact of the Second World War
on Germany
Through the 1930s , Hitler fulfilled his promises to the German people that he
would:
•  reverse the Treaty of Versailles
•  rebuild Germany’s armed forces
•  unite Germany and Austria
•  extend German territory into eastern Europe.
He fulfilled each of these aims, but started the Second World War in the
process.
Germans had no great enthusiasm for war. People still had memories of the
First World War. But in war, as in peacetime, the Nazis used all methods
available to make the German people support the regime.
Food r ationing was introduced soon after war began in September 1939.
Clothes rationing followed in November 1939. Even so, from 1939 t o 1941
it was not difficult to keep up civilian morale because the war went
spectacularly well for Germany. Hitler was in control of much of western
and eastern Europe and supplies of luxury goods  flowed into Germany from
captured territories.
However, in 1941 H itler took the massive gamble of invading the SOVIET
UNION, and for the next three years his troops  were engaged in an
increasingly expensive war with Russian forces who ‘tore the heart out of the
German army’, as the British war leader, Winston Churchill, put it. As the
tide turned against the German armies, civilians found their lives
increasingly disrupted. They had to cut back on heating, work longer hours
and recycle their rubbish. Goebbels redoubled his censorship efforts. He
tried to maintain people’s support for the war by involving them in it through
asking them to make sacrifices. They donated an estimated 1.5 m illion fur
coats to help to clothe the German army in Russia.
At this stage in the war, the German people began to see and hear less of
Hitler. His old speeches were broadcast by Goebbels, but Hitler was
increasingly preoccupied with the detail of the war. In 1942 t he ‘Final
Solution’ began (see pages 289–291), which was to kill millions of Jewish
civilians in German-occupied countries.
Factfile
Germany’s war economy
•  When war broke out it did not bring massive changes to the
German economy because Germany had been preparing for it
since the mid-1930s.
•  In the early stages of the war, Germany was short of raw
materials. This was made worse when the British navy blockaded
sea routes into Germany.
•  As the German forces conquered territories they took raw
materials and goods from these territories. For example,
Germany took around 20 per cent of Norway’s entire production
in 1940.
•  From 1942 German production was shifted towards armaments
to supply the army fighting against Russia.
•  Huge corporations like IG Farben produced chemicals,
explosives and the infamous gas used in the death camps.
•  German factories used forced labour from occupied countries.
Most factories had a significant number of prisoners in their
workforce and estimates suggest that forced labourers made up
around 25 per cent of the workforce.
•  By 1944 there had been a vast increase in military production.
Production of aircraft and tanks trebled compared to 1942.
•  Production was hampered by Allied bombing and some factories
were moved underground.
•  There is an ongoing debate about the effectiveness of the Nazi
war economy. The traditional view is that the economy was
mismanaged until 1942 and then improved. However, this account
is based on the writings of Albert Speer. Some historians believe
he exaggerated his own importance and that the war economy
became more efficient after 1942 simply because Germany
focused production away from civilian goods and onto military
equipment.
From 1942, A lbert Speer began to direct Germany’s war economy (see
Factfile). All effort focused on the armament industries. Postal services were
suspended and letter boxes were closed. All places of entertainment were
closed, except cinemas – Goebbels needed these to show propaganda films.
Women were drafted into the labour force in increasing numbers. Country
areas had to take evacuees from the cities and refugees from eastern Europe.
These measures were increasingly carried out by the SS. In fact, the SS
became virtually a state within the German state. This SS empire had its own
armed forces, armaments industries and labour camps. It developed a
business empire that was worth a fortune. However, even the SS could not
win the war, or even keep up German morale.
With defeat looming, support for the Nazis weakened. Germans stoppe d
declaring food t hey had. They stayed away from Nazi rallies. They refused to
give the ‘Heil Hitler’ salute when asked to do s o. Himmler even contacted
the Allies to ask about possible peace terms.
FOCUS TASK 9.20
How did the war change life in Germany?
1  Draw a timeline from 1939 to 1945 down the middle of a page.
2  On the left, make notes from pages 286–293 on how the war
was going for Germany’s army.
3  On the right, make notes to show how the war affected
Germans at home in Germany.
4  Choose one change from the right-hand column that you think
had the greatest impact on ordinary Germans and explain your
choice.
The bombing of Dresden
It was the bom bing of Germany which had the most dramatic effect on the
lives of German civilians. In 1942 t he Allies decided on a new policy
towards the bom bing of Germany. Under Arthur ‘Bomber’ Harris the British
began an all-out assault on both industrial and residential areas of all the
major German cities. One of the objectives was to cripple German industry,
the other was to lower the morale of civilians and to terrorise them into
submission.
The bom bing escalated through the next three years, culminating in the
bombing of Dresden in February 1945 w hich killed between 35,000 a nd
150,000 pe ople in two days. Sources 20–22 tell you more about that
bombing.
SOURCE 19
Goebbels does not always tell you the truth. When he tells you that
England is powerless do you believe that? Have you forgotten that
our bombers fly over Germany at will? The bombs that fell with
these leaflets tell you … The war lasts as long as Hitler’s regime.
Translation of a leaflet dropped by the Allies
on Berlin.
The end of the war
By 1945 t he German people were in a desperate state. Food s upplies were
dwindling. Already 3.5 m illion German civilians had died. Refugees were
fleeing the advancing Russian armies in the east.
Three months after the massive destruction of Dresden, Germany’s war was
over. Hitler, Goebbels and other Nazi war leaders committed suicide or
were captured. Germany surrendered. It was a shattered country. The Nazi
promises lay in tatters and the country was divided up into zones of
occupation run by the British, French, US and Soviet forces (see page 95).
SOURCE 20
The greatest effect on [civilian] morale will be produced if a new
blow of catastrophic force can be struck at a time when the
situation already appears desperate.
From a secret report to the British
Government, 1944.
Think!
What do Sources 19–22 tell you about:
a)  the aims of the bombing
b)  the success of the bombing?
SOURCE 21

The centre of Dresden after the bombing in
February 1945.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can:
•  describe three changes which the war caused for Germans
•  explain how at least one change affected Germans for the
worse.
FIGURE 22
A map showing the destruction of Dresden.
Dresden was an industrial city, but the major
damage was to civilian areas.
How did war affect young people?
In 1939 m embership of a Nazi youth movement was made compulsory. But
by this time many of the experienced leaders had been drafted into the
German army. Many of the movements were now run by older teenagers who
rigidly enforced Nazi rules. They even forbade other teenagers from meeting
informally with their friends.
As the war progressed, the activities of the youth movements focused
increasingly on the war effort and military drill. The popu larity of the
movements decreased and indeed an anti-Hitler Youth movement appeared.
The Nazis identified two distinct groups of young people who they were
worried about: the Swing movement and the EDELWEISS PIRATES.
SOURCE 23
The formation of cliques, i.e. groupings of young people outside
the Hitler Youth, has been on the increase before and particularly
during the war to such a degree that one must speak of a serious
risk of political, moral and criminal subversion of our youth.
From a report by the Nazi youth leadership,
1942.
The ‘Swing’ movement
This was made up mainly of middle-class teenagers. They went to parties
where they listened to English and American music and sang English songs.
They danced American dances such as the ‘jitterbug’ to banned jazz music.
They accepted Jews at their clubs. They talked about and enjoyed sex. They
were deliberately ‘slovenly’. The Nazis issued a handbook  helping the
authorities to identify these degenerate types.
Revision Tip
•  The Edelweiss Pirates and Swing movements are important
examples of resistance. Make sure you can describe each
movement.
•  Prepare two points to argue that the Pirates were a more
serious threat to the Nazis than the Swing movement.
The Edelweiss Pirates
The Edelweiss Pirates were working-class teenagers. They were not an
organised movement, and groups in various cities took different names: ‘The
Roving Dudes’ (Essen); the ‘Kittelbach Pirates’ (Düsseldorf); the ‘Navajos’
(Cologne). The Nazis, however, classified all the groups under the single
name ‘Edelweiss Pirates’ and the groups did have a lot in common.
The Pirates were mainly aged between fourteen and seventeen (Germans
could leave school at fourteen, but they did not have to sign on for military
service until they were seventeen). They sang songs, just like the Hitler
Youth, but changed the lyrics to mock Germany, and when they spotted bands
of Hitler Youth they taunted and sometimes attacked them.
The Pirates’ activities caused serious worries to the Nazi authorities in some
cities. In December 1942 t he Gestapo br oke up 28 g roups containing 739
adolescents. The Nazi approach to the Pirates was different from their
approach to other minorities. As long as they needed future workers and
future soldiers they could not simply exterminate all these teenagers or put
them in concentration camps (although Himmler did suggest that). They
therefore responded uncertainly – sometimes arresting the Pirates, sometimes
ignoring them.
In 1944 i n Cologne, Pirate activities escalated. They helped to shelter army
deserters and escaped prisoners. They stole armaments and took part in an
attack on the Gestapo du ring which its chief was killed. The Nazi response
was to round up the so called ‘ringleaders’. Twelve were publicly hanged in
November 1944.
Neither of the groups described above  had strong political views. They were
not political oppon ents of the Nazis. But they resented and resisted Nazi
control of their lives.
SOURCE 24
The public hanging of twelve Edelweiss
Pirates in Cologne in 1944.
How did war affect the Jews and other
persecuted groups?
You have already seen how the Nazis persecuted Jews and other minority
groups in Germany in the 1930s . Once the war began, this persecution
reached new depths of brutality. At the same time, it became more carefully
organised.
Polish ghettos
After invading Poland in 1939, t he Nazis set about ‘Germanising’ western
Poland. This meant transporting Poles from their homes and replacing them
with German settlers. Around one in five Poles died, either in the fighting or
as a result of racial policies in the period 1939–45. Polish Jews were
rounded up and transported to the big cities. Here they were herded into
sealed areas, called ghettos. Able-bodied Jews were used for slave labour
but the young, the old and the sick were left to die of hunger and disease.
SOURCE 25
A photograph, probably taken by German
army photographers, of Jews arriving at the
Warsaw ghetto in 1940.
SOURCE 26
I saw much suffering. The ghetto was very overcrowded. There
was a typhoid epidemic. Many buildings, including where I lived
with my grandfather, were under quarantine.
During the winter I was very cold; to keep warm I stayed in bed
covered by whatever I could find. I was continuously hungry. I was
dreaming of the white Kaiser rolls that I had for breakfast before
the war in Katowice. In the ghetto, young starving children were
begging for food, dead bodies were lying in the streets.
I had relatives who lived across from the notorious Pawiak prison,
run by the Gestapo, where executions took place daily. On one visit
to their house, crossing a checkpoint manned by police, I was
beaten up by a policeman for no reason at all, but simply because I
was there.
In the early summer of 1942, my mother decided that for my
survival it was necessary for me to be smuggled out of the ghetto.
It was just in time, because the transport of Warsaw Jews to the
death camp of Treblinka started a few months later.
Ed Herman’s memories of the Warsaw
ghetto, published on a website in 2013.
Herman was nine years old in 1940.
Mass murder
In 1941, G ermany invaded the USSR. Within weeks the Nazis found
themselves in control of 3 million Soviet Jews (in addition to the Jews in all
the other countries they had conquered). German forces had orders to round
up and shoot Communist Party activists and their Jewish supporters. The
executions were carried out by special SS units called Einsatzgruppe n. By
the autumn of 1941, m ass shootings were taking place all over occupied
eastern Europe. In Germany, all Jews were ordered to wear the star of David
on their clothing to mark them out.
The ‘Final Solution’
In January 1942, a  group of senior Nazis met at Wannsee, a suburb of Berlin,
to discuss what they called the ‘Final Solution’ to the ‘Jewish Question’.
There, Himmler, head of the SS and Gestapo, w as put in charge of the
systematic killing of all Jews within Germany and German-occupied
territory. Slave labour and death camps were built at Auschwitz, Treblinka
and Chelmno in Poland, among other places. The old, the sick and young
children were killed immediately. The rest were sent to work at the labour
camps. Some were used for medical experiments. Six million Jews, 500,000
European Gypsies and countless political prisoners, Jehovah’s Witnesses,
homosexuals and Russian and Polish prisoners of war were sent to these
camps, where they were worked to death, gassed or shot.
SOURCE 27
Wedding rings taken from people killed at
Buchenwald concentration camp.
Think!
1  There are many websites, TV programmes and books about the
mass murders during the war. Some of these contain shocking
images of dead bodies, gas chambers, cremation ovens and
other horrors. We have chosen Sources 27 and 28 instead. Why
do you think we did this?
2  The systematic killing of the Jews by the Nazis is generally
known today as the Holocaust, which means ‘sacrifice’. Many
people prefer the Jewish term Sho’ah, which means
‘destruction’. Why do you think this is?
SOURCE 28
A child’s drawing of prisoners arriving at the
Auschwitz death camp.
Who resisted?
Many Jews escaped from Germany before the killing started. Other Jews
managed to live under cover in Germany and the occupied territories. Some
joined resistance groups. Gad Beck, for example, led the Jewish resistance
to the Nazis in Berlin. He was finally captured in April 1945. On the day he
was due to be executed, he was rescued by troops  from the Jewish regiment
of the Soviet army. There were 28 k nown groups of Jewish fighters, and
there may have been more. Many Jews fought in the resistance movements in
the Nazi-occupied lands. In 1945, t he Jews in the Warsaw ghetto in Poland
rose up against the Nazis and held out against them for four weeks. There
were armed uprisings in five concentration camps, and Greek Jews managed
to blow up the gas ovens at Auschwitz.
We also know that many Germans and others helped Jews by hiding them and
smuggling them out of German-held territory. The industrialist Oskar
Schindler protected and saved many people by getting them on to his ‘list’ of
workers. The Swedish diplomat Raoul Wallenberg worked with other
resisters to provide Jews with Swedish and US passports to get them out of
the reach of the Nazis in Hungary. He disappeared in mysterious
circumstances in 1945. Of course, high-profile individuals such as these
were rare. Most of the successful resisters were successful because they kept
an extremely low profile and were discovered neither by the Nazis at the
time, nor by historians since then.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe the ghettos and the Final Solution.
•  Identify three examples that show how Nazi actions against Jews
and other groups became more violent as the war went on.
Who was responsible?
Was the ‘Final Solution’ planned from the
start?
Historians have long debated how far Hitler had planned this ‘Final
Solution’. Some historians (intentionalists) believe that the whole process
had been carefully planned, for years. Others (structuralists) argue that there
was no clear plan and that the policy of mass murder evolved during the war
years. Lack of evidence makes it difficult to know for sure. Hitler had made
speeches in which he talked of the annihilation of the Jews, but there are no
documents with his signature and no record of him ever giving any orders
directly relating to the extermination of the Jews. The Nazis kept the
programme as secret as they could, so there are relatively few documents.
Responsibility
Although historians disagree about whether Hitler planned this, they do
generally agree that Hitler was ultimately responsible. However, other
individuals and organisations shared responsibility. The genocide would not
have been possible without:
•  the Civil Service bureaucracy who collected, stored and supplied
information about Jews
•  police forces in Germany and the occupied territories: many victims of
the Nazis were actually seized by the police rather than the Gestapo or  SS
•  the SS: Adolf Eichmann devised a system of transporting Jews to
collection points and then on to the death camps. He was also in charge of
looting the possessions of the Jews. The SS Death’s Head battalions and
Einsatzgruppen also carried out many of the killings
•  the Wehrmacht (the German armed forces): army leaders were fully
aware of what was going on
•  industry: companies such as Volkswagen and Mercedes had their own
slave labour camps. The chemical giant IG Farben competed with other
companies for the contract to make the Cyclon B gas that was used in the
gas chambers
•  the German people: anti-Semitism was widespread. They may not have
wanted mass murder but they turned a blind eye to it. Many German
civilians went further and took part in some aspect of the HOLOCAUST, but
ignored the full reality (see Source 29).
SOURCE 29
The extermination of the Jews is the most dreadful chapter in
German history, doubly so because the men who did it closed their
senses to the reality of what they were doing by taking pride in the
technical efficiency of their actions and, at moments when their
conscience threatened to break in, telling themselves that they
were doing their duty … Others took refuge in the enormity of the
operation, which lent it a convenient depersonalisation. When they
ordered a hundred Jews to get on a train in Paris or Amsterdam,
they considered their job accomplished and carefully closed their
minds to the thought that eventually those passengers would arrive
in front of the ovens of Treblinka.
US historian Gordon Craig, writing in 1978.
Think!
The war clearly increased persecution of Jews and other
minorities:
1  War massively increased the numbers of Jews and other groups
who came under Nazi control.
2  War allowed leading Nazis to pursue their racial policies even
more fiercely than they previously had.
3  War made it difficult to resist Nazi racial policies and brought
opportunities for individuals and groups who took part in
persecution.
Work through pages 289–291 and find examples to use as
evidence of each development above.
Did the war increase opposition to the
Nazi regime?
You have already read some examples of oppos ition to Nazi control during
the war, such as the Edelweiss Pirates (page 288) and Gad Beck leading
Jewish resistance in Berlin (page 290). The war increased oppos ition in
other ways.
Organised resistance groups emerged
One of the best-known resistance groups was the White Rose, run by Hans
and Sophie Scholl and friends. The White Rose published and distributed
anti-Nazi leaflets. This was a small movement, although its members were
certainly brave. The Scholls were executed in February 1943.
Church leaders challenged Nazi policies
The Catholic Bishop C lemens Galen had criticised the Nazis throughout the
1930s . In 1941, h e led a popu lar protest against the Nazi policy of killing
mentally ill and physically disabled people, which forced the Nazis to stop
this programme temporarily. Galen had such strong support that the Nazis
decided it was too risky to try to silence him – they did not want social
unrest while Germany was at war.
Dietrich Bonhoeffer had also preached against the Nazis until the Gestapo
stoppe d him in 1937. He then became involved with members of the army’s
intelligence services who were secretly oppos ed to Hitler. He helped Jews
to escape from Germany. In 1942, h e asked Allied commanders what peace
terms they would offer Germany if Hitler was overthrown. He was arrested
in October 1942 a nd hanged shortly before the end of the war, in April 1945.
Army leaders plotted against Hitler
The only group that really had much chance of overthrowing the Nazis was
the army. Some leaders had challenged Hitler in the 1930s . For example,
General von Fritsch and Field-Marshall von Blomberg argued against
Hitler’s plan to invade Germany’s neighbours, fearing a disastrous war.
Hitler had them removed – F ritsch because the Nazis ‘found out’ his wife
was a prostitute and von  Blomberg was accused of homosexuality.
As the war progressed the army became increasingly indivisible from the
Nazi regime. Even so, there were attempts by senior army officers to
assassinate Hitler. We know of five attempts between June 1940 a nd
December 1943, bu t they all failed.
The July Bomb Plot, 1944
The closest to success came in July 1944. By this stage, many army officers
were sure that the war was lost and that Hitler was leading Germany to ruin.
One of these was a colonel in the army, Count von Stauffenberg. On 20 J uly
he planted a bom b in Hitler’s conference room. The plan was to kill Hitler,
close dow n the radio stations, round up the other leading Nazis and take over
Germany. It failed on all counts because the revolt was poor ly planned and
organised. Hitler survived and the Nazis took a terrible revenge, killing 5000
people.
FOCUS TASK 9.21
How did war affect opposition to the Nazi regime?
Using these two pages or your own additional research, list
examples of opposition to Nazi rule during the war years. For each
example:
a)  Decide whether you think it was a new type of opposition
caused by war or whether it already existed and was made
worse by war. You will need to refer back to your work on
page 276.
b)  On a scale of 0–10, decide how serious each type of opposition
was. A mark of 10 would mean a genuine threat to overthrow
Hitler.
c)  Now decide which of the factors on page 293 (terror, the ‘Hitler
myth’ etc.) would have been most effective in stopping each
type of resistance from succeeding.
Low-level resistance increased
The many types of lower-level resistance which we noted on page 276
increased as well. SS and Gestapo reports were increasingly concerned
about the discontent and disillusionment caused by bom bing raids, shortages
and heavy casualties. This was leading to increasing loss of control, for
example civilians hiding food f rom the authorities.
However…
We must be careful not to exaggerate oppos ition to the regime or the war
effort. In fact, support for the war remained remarkably strong almost to the
end. When Protestant church minister Wilhelm Kenath criticised the war at
the funeral of a young soldier in May 1943 h e was reported to the Nazis by
several mourners. Among ordinary Germans there was a misplaced faith in
Hitler that he would find a way to lead them to victory.
Why was there not more opposition to
the Nazis?
When you know the way the story of Nazi Germany developed and the
disaster that Hitler proved to be for Germany and its people it is hard to
understand why there was not more oppos ition. Here is a review of the main
explanations:
Terror
This has to be top of any list of explanations. The Nazi police state
was designed to scare Germans into submission, and it worked. It
continued long into the war. Even in the final days of the war, when
all seemed lost, the local Gestapo still rounded up and hung some
saboteurs who had blown up a railway track to help the enemy.
The ‘Hitler myth’
Hitler was a charismatic leader. Nazi propaganda had built him up
still further into a godlike figure who controlled Germany’s destiny.
Even Germans who disliked the Nazis still respected Hitler
personally and did not blame him for many of the unpleasant or
unfair things which Nazi officials did. This belief in Hitler remained
strong and was only shaken towards the end of the Second World
War.
Divided opposition
Left-wing groups such as the Communists and the Social
Democrats were the natural enemies of Nazism. They were both
banned. However, these groups did not trust each other and were
not prepared to work together. They were leaderless and divided.
They never mounted any co-ordinated resistance.
Approval
Many people were pleased with the Nazis. They had been swept to
power in 1933 because of the failings of Weimar democracy. Hitler
had delivered on many of his promises. He had restored German
pride internationally. He had got the economy moving again. Even
those who did not support all Nazi policies were prepared to
tolerate them for the sake of the stability and prosperity the Nazis
had brought. This continued well into the early years of the war.
Propaganda and censorship
Censorship and propaganda meant that the newspapers and radio
only spread news of Nazi achievements. This did not let up in
wartime; in fact it increased. After Kristallnacht in 1938, when they
could see that many Germans were unhappy with it, the Nazis kept
all future measures against the Jews secret and did not publicise
them in the way they had their anti-Jewish policies in the early
1930s.
FOCUS TASK 9.22
Was Germany a totalitarian state?
A totalitarian state is one where:
•  no opposition is allowed
•  people are expected to show total loyalty and obedience to the
state
•  every aspect of life is controlled by the state for its own benefit.
You are going to prepare for a debate on the question: Was Nazi
Germany a totalitarian state? Clearly Hitler wanted Germany to be
like this, but did the Nazis achieve it?
Stage A: Research
Read through this chapter gathering as much evidence as you can
about where Nazi Germany fits on this continuum.
Use the text and the sources and your own research. Here are a
few references to get you started.
Page 262
Factfile
Summarises the step-by-step Nazi consolidation of power.
Page 288
Source 24
Photo of the punishment of twelve young people (Edelweiss
Pirates) in Cologne in 1944.
Page 270
Source 7
The diary of Victor Klemperer for 8 August 1937 describes his
experience of going to the cinema.
Page 274
Source 14
H. Schmidt, Labour Corps leader, in an interview in 1938,
describes his attitude to Nazi policy towards Jews.
Page 268
Source 6
Photos of the annual Nazi rally at Nuremberg – a celebration of
Nazi power and discipline.
Page 282
Source 14
Albert Speer, who was the Nazis’ minister of armaments and
war, writes in 1970 about how he tried to affect Nazi policy on
women workers.
Page 291
Source 29
American historian Gordon Craig writes in 1978 about the
attitudes of Nazi officials to their role in the Final Solution.
Page 272
Source 10
British historian and journalist Charles Wheeler, writing in 1996,
describes how Church leaders responded to the Nazis.
Be sure to note where you found each extra piece of evidence. If
possible, share your evidence with others. Discuss it.
Stage B: Reach your judgement
1  Taking all the evidence, do you think that the Nazis managed to
turn Germany into a totalitarian state? Where on the continuum
would you put Nazi rule?
2  Would your answer change if you chose particular years: 1936,
1939, 1941, 1945.
Stage C: Write your speech
Aim for just one minute (200–250 words). State your view. Use
evidence to support your arguments.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Anti-Semitism
•  Autobahn
•  Bauhaus
•  Beauty of Labour
•  Chancellor
•  Communist (Bolshevik)
•  Concentration camp
•  Concordat
•  Conscription
•  Consolidation
•  Constitution
•  Dawes Plan
•  Democracy
•  Diktat
•  Edelweiss Pirates
•  Enabling Act
•  Final Solution
•  Freikorps
•  Führer
•  Gestapo
•  Gleichschaltung (co-ordination)
•  Hitler Youth
•  Holocaust
•  Hyperinflation
•  Kaiser
•  Kristallnacht
•  League of German Maidens
•  Mein Kampf
•  Munich Putsch
•  National Community (Volksgemeinschaft)
•  Nazism
•  Negative cohesion
•  Night of the Long Knives
•  Nuremberg Laws
•  Nuremberg rally
•  Propaganda
•  Rearmament
•  Reichstag
•  Reparations
•  Republic
•  Ruhr
•  SA
•  Spartacists
•  SS
•  Strength Through Joy
•  Totalitarian
•  Treaty of Versailles
•  Volk
•  Weimar
Key Question Summary
What was it like to live in Nazi Germany?
  1  Young people were expected to join the Hitler Youth. There
were separate organisations for boys and girls.
  2  The boys focused on activities that taught them to be soldiers.
The girls focused on healthy living and preparing for
motherhood.
  3  The school curriculum was also used to indoctrinate young
people. Teachers were among the keenest supporters of the
Nazis.
  4  Not all young people liked the Nazis and once the war started
opposition to the Hitler Youth among young people increased
and groups like the Edelweiss Pirates actively resisted.
  5  The Nazis rewarded German women for having children – the
more the better. They discouraged women from working and
encouraged them to stay at home and look after children.
  6  However, later on they also needed women to become workers
so they had to change their policies to encourage women to do
both.
  7  The Nazis promised to end unemployment, which they did, but
only by drafting hundreds of thousands of people into the army
or putting political opponents to forced labour.
  8  The economy recovered in the 1930s but business was geared
towards getting ready for war, making weapons or becoming
self-sufficient in raw materials.
  9  For those who did not fit Nazi ideas life was terrible. The Jews
suffered in particular, facing restrictions, then persecution or
exile, and in the end forced labour and genocide.
10  The war went well for Germany to start with. However, after
Germany invaded Russia in 1941 the tide turned. German
resources were directed into a fighting an unwinnable war
against the USSR. The German economy and the Nazi regime
collapsed.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
Paper 1-type questions
1  (a)  What was the Munich Putsch? [4]
    (b)  Explain why the Nazis launched the Munich Putsch in 1923.
[6]
    (c)  ‘The Munich Putsch was a total failure for Adolf Hitler.’ How
far do you agree with this statement? Explain your answer.
[10]
Paper 4-type questions
2  How important was the Depression in bringing about the end of
the Weimar Republic?
3  How significant was the work of Himmler in maintaining Nazi
control of Germany after 1933?
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face
10 The USA, 1919–41
KEY QUESTIONS
10A  How far did the US economy boom in the 1920s?
10B  How far did US society change in the 1920s?
10C  What were the causes and consequences of the Wall Street
Crash?
10D  How successful was the New Deal?

This photo was taken in California by Dorothea Lange during the
Great Depression of the early 1930s. It was taken in a temporary
camp for workers who had come to California to find a job. It is
called ‘Migrant Mother’ and is one of the most famous and widely
used photographs about this period.
1  What impression does this photo give you of the woman?
2  This was a carefully constructed photo – what does the
photographer want you to feel and think and how has she
achieved that?
At the end of the First World War the USA was the richest and most pow erful
country in the world. The next two decades were a turbulent time: a BOOM
then a bust; a time of oppor tunity for some but a time of trauma for others.
In 10A you will look at the boom ing US economy in the 1920s . You will look
at the causes of this economic boom  and also its consequences. Most
important of all, you will investigate which Americans shared in the new
prosperity and what happened to those who did not.
In 10B you will examine the changes that took place in the 1920s ,
particularly for women, immigrants and African Americans.
In 10C you will examine the economic disaster that plunged the USA into
crisis – the WALL STREET CRASH of 1929 – a nd how the Crash led to a deep
economic DEPRESSION.
In 10D you will look at the NEW DEAL: the measures President Roosevelt
used to help the USA recover. You will examine the range of measures taken,
the thinking behind those measures and how people reacted to them. Most of
all you will think hard about whether or not the New Deal should be seen as
a success or not.
Timeline
This timeline shows the period you will be covering in this chapter. Some of
the key dates are filled in already. To help you get a complete picture of the
period m ake your own much larger version and add ot her details to it as you
work through the chapter.
10A How far did the US economy boom
in the 1920s?
FOCUS
As you saw in Chapter 1, after the First World War President
Wilson determined that from then on the USA should take a lead in
world affairs. He proposed an international LEAGUE OF NATIONS that
would be like a world parliament that prevented aggression
between countries. As you saw in Chapter 2, Wilson failed in this
attempt. He even failed to get the USA to agree to join the League
at all.
Instead Wilson was defeated and the USA turned its back on
Europe, a policy known as ‘isolationism’. A new president, Warren
Harding, promised a return to ‘normalcy’ by which he meant life as it
had been before the war. Americans turned their energies to what
they did best – making money! Over the next ten years the USA,
already the richest country in the world, became richer still as its
economy boomed.
In 10.1 you will examine the reasons for this boom and also the
extent. You will also see that while some people in America
benefited greatly from the boom there were significant proportions
– possibly even the majority – who did not share in the boom at all.
Focus Points
•  On what factors was the economic boom based?
•  Why did some industries prosper while others did not?
•  Why did agriculture not share in the prosperity?
•  Did all Americans benefit from the boom?
What was the boom?
The ‘boom ’ is the name given to the dynamic growth of the American
economy in the decade after the First World War.
In the 1920s  American businesses grew more quickly than ever before. They
found faster and cheaper ways of making goods  than ever before. As
production went up prices came dow n so ordinary people bought more
household goods  than ever before: millions of fridges and cars were sold;
hundreds of millions of nylon stockings.
Many families bought new houses in the suburbs of America’s rapidly
growing cities. And with money to spare they spent more on leisure – so the
music, radio, cinema industries and even sport were boom ing.
Company profits were boom ing and confidence was boom ing too. Business
leaders were prepared to take risks and ordinary people were too. Banks had
money to spare so they invested it in the STOCK MARKET or lent it to ordinary
Americans to do s o. The value of stocks and SHARES went up and up.
The Government built more roads than ever before. More homes were
supplied with electricity and phone lines than ever before. There was more
building being done in the boom  years of the 1920s  than ever before. And, as
if to symbolise the massive confidence of the time, cities built higher
skyscrapers than ever before.
It seemed that everything was going up, up, up!
This may all sound too good t o be true – and it was! The whole system came
crashing dow n with a bang in 1929 bu t that is another story which you will
investigate on page 325. For now you will focus on the boom  years and why
exactly American industry was so successful in the 1920s .
Think!
What was the boom?
1  These cards show nine key features of the 1920s economic
boom. Make your own set of cards – large enough to write
some information on the back.
2  As you read this chapter write notes on each card to summarise
how this was changing in the 1920s and how it contributed to the
boom.
3  Working on a larger piece of paper, make notes about how
these different features are linked.
NB Keep your cards. They will be useful for Focus Task 10.2 on
page 303. They will also be useful for revision.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe at least three aspects of the boom.
Factors behind the economic boom
Industrial strength
The USA was a vast country, rich in natural resources. It had a growing
popu lation (123 m illion by 1923) . Most of this popu lation was living in
towns and cities. They were working in industry and commerce, usually
earning higher wages than in farming. So these new town dwellers became an
important market for the USA’s new industries. Most US companies had no
need to export outside the USA, and most US companies had access to the
raw materials they needed in the USA.
Think!
Why did it benefit American industry to have raw materials,
especially coal, oil and cotton, so easily available within the USA?
FIGURE 1
The USA’s main centres of population and
main natural resources around 1920.
By the time of the First World War, the USA led the world in most areas of
industry. It had massive steel, coal and textile industries. It was the leading
oil producer. It was foremost in developing new technology such as motor
cars, telephones and electric lighting. In fact, electricity and electrical goods
were a key factor in the USA’s economic boom . Other new industries such as
chemicals were also growing fast. The USA’s new film industry already led
the world.
The managers of these industries were increasingly skilled and professional,
and they were selling more and more of their products not just in the USA but
in Europe, Latin America and the Far East.
American agriculture had become the most efficient and productive in the
world. In 1914, m ost Americans would have confidently stated that
American agriculture and industry were going from strength to strength.
Revision Tip
On this page and the next four there are quite a few factors
explaining the boom. Focus on two per page. Make sure you can
explain how the factor contributed to the boom.
The First World War
The Americans tried hard to stay out of the fighting in the First World War.
But throughout the war they lent money to the Allies, and sold arms and
munitions to Britain and France. They sold massive amounts of foods tuffs as
well. This one-way trade gave American industry a real boos t. In addition,
while the European pow ers slugged it out in France, the Americans were
able to take over Europe’s trade around the world. American exports to the
areas controlled by European colonial pow ers increased during the war.
There were other benefits as well. Before the war Germany had one of the
world’s most successful chemicals industries. The war stoppe d it in its
tracks. By the end of the war the USA had far outstripped Germany in the
supply of chemical products. Explosives manufacture during the war also
stimulated a range of by-products which became new American industries in
their own right. Plastics and other new materials were produced.
Aircraft technology was improved during the First World War. From 1918
these developments were applied to civilian uses. In 1918 t here were
virtually no civilian airlines. By 1930 t he new aircraft companies flew
162,000 f lights a year.
Historians have called the growth and change at this time the USA’s second
industrial revolution. The war actually helped rather than hindered the
‘revolution’.
When the USA joined the fighting it was not in the war long enough for it to
drain American resources in the way it drained Europe’s. There was a
downturn in the USA when war industries readjusted to peacetime, but it was
only a blip. By 1922 t he American economy was growing fast once again.
Factfile
US system of government
•  The federal system: The USA’s federal system means that all
the individual states look after their own internal affairs (such as
education). Questions that concern all of the states (such as
making treaties with other countries) are dealt with by Congress.
•  The Constitution: The CONSTITUTION lays out how the
government is supposed to operate and what it is allowed to do.
•  The president: He (or she) is the single most important politician
in the USA. He is elected every four years. However, the
Constitution of the USA is designed to stop one individual from
becoming too powerful. Congress and the SUPREME COURT both
act as ‘watchdogs’, checking how the president behaves.
•  Congress: Congress is made up of the Senate and the House of
Representatives. Congress and the president run the country.
•  The Supreme Court: This is made up of judges, who are usually
very experienced lawyers. Their main task is to make sure that
American governments do not misuse their power or pass unfair
laws. They have the power to say that a law is unconstitutional
(against the Constitution), which usually means that they feel the
law would harm American citizens.
•  Parties: There are two main political parties, the REPUBLICANS
and the DEMOCRATS. In the 1920s and 1930s, the Republicans
were stronger in the industrial north of the USA while the
Democrats had more support in the south. On the whole,
Republicans in the 1920s and 1930s preferred government to
stay out of people’s lives if possible. The Democrats were more
prepared to intervene in everyday life.
Republican policies
A third factor behind the boom  was the policies of the Republican Party.
From 1920 t o 1932 a ll the US presidents were Republican, and Republicans
also dom inated Congress. Here are some of their beliefs.
1 Laissez-faire
Republicans believed that government should interfere as little as
possible in the everyday lives of the people. This attitude is called
‘LAISSEZ-FAIRE’. In their view, the job of the president was to leave
businesspeople alone to do their job. That was where prosperity
came from.
This was closely related to their belief in ‘rugged individualism’.
They admired the way Americans were strong and got on with
solving their own problems.
2 Protective tariffs
The Republicans believed in import TARIFFS which made it expensive
to import foreign goods. For example, in 1922 Harding introduce the
Fordney–McCumber tariff which made imported food expensive in
the USA. These tariffs protected businesses against foreign
COMPETITION and allowed American companies to grow even more
rapidly.
3 Low taxation
The Republicans kept taxation as low as possible. This brought
some benefits to ordinary working people, but it brought even more
to the very wealthy. The Republican thinking was that if people kept
their own money, they would spend it on American goods and
wealthy people would reinvest their money in industries.
4 Powerful trusts
TRUSTS were huge super-corporations, which dominated industry.
Woodrow Wilson and the Democrats had fought against trusts
because they believed it was unhealthy for men such as Carnegie
(steel) and Rockefeller (oil) to have almost complete control of one
vital sector of industry. The Republicans allowed the trusts to do
what they wanted, believing that the ‘captains of industry’ knew
better than politicians did about what was good for the USA.
FIGURE 2
The growth of the US economy in the 1920s.
New industries, new methods
Through the 1920s  new industries and new methods of production were
developed in the USA. The country was able to exploit its vast resources of
raw materials to produce steel, chemicals, glass and machinery. Electricity
was changing America too. Before the First World War industry was still
largely pow ered by coal. By the 1920s  electricity had taken over. In 1918
only a few homes were supplied; by 1929 a lmost all urban homes had it.
These new industries in turn became the foundation of an enormous boom  in
consumer goods . Telephones, radios, vacuum cleaners and washing machines
were mass-produced on a vast scale. MASS PRODUCTION methods meant that
huge amounts of goods  could be produced much more cheaply and so more
people could afford them.
Think!
1  How could the Republicans use Figure 2 to justify their policies?
2  How could critics of Republican policies use Figure 2 to attack
the Republicans?
Things that used to be luxuries were now made cheaper by new inventions
and mass production. For example, silk stockings had once been a luxury
item reserved for the rich. In 1900 on ly 12,000 pa irs had been sold. In the
1920s  rayon was invented, which was a cheaper substitute for silk. In 1930,
300 m illion pairs of stockings were sold to a female popu lation of around
100 m illion.
Revision Tip
Which factors have you chosen from pages 298–301? Practise
explaining how they caused the boom rather than just describing
them.
The car
The most important of these new boom ing industries was the motor-car or
automobile industry. The motor car had only been developed in the 1890s .
The first cars were built by blacksmiths and other skilled craftsmen. They
took a long time to make and were very expensive. In 1900 on ly 4000 c ars
were made. Car production was revolutionised by Henry Ford. In 1913 h e
set up the world’s first moving PRODUCTION LINE, in a giant shed in Detroit.
Each worker on the line had one or two small jobs to do a s the skeleton of
the car moved past him. At the beginning of the line, a skeleton car went in; at
the end of the line was a new car. The most famous of these was the Model T.
More than 15 m illion were produced between 1908 a nd 1925. In 1927 t hey
came off the production line at a rate of one every ten seconds. In 1929, 4.8
million cars were made. In 1925 t hey cost $290. This was only three months’
wages for an American factory worker.
Think!
Why were mass production techniques so crucial to production and
consumption of goods made by the new industries?
SOURCE 3
The new roads gave rise to a new truck
industry. In 1919 there were 1 million trucks
in the USA. By 1929 there were 3.5 million.
SOURCE 4
Ford’s production line in 1913.
By the end of the 1920s  the motor industry was the USA’s biggest industry.
As well as employing hundreds of thousands of workers directly, it also kept
workers in other industries in employment. Glass, leather, steel and rubber
were all required to build the new vehicles. Automobiles used up 75 pe r cent
of US glass production in the 1920s ! Petrol was needed to run them. And a
massive army of labourers was busily building roads throughout the country
for these cars to drive on. In fact, road construction was the biggest single
employer in the 1920s .
Owning a car was not just a rich person’s privilege, as it was in Europe.
There was one car to five people in the USA compared with one to 43 i n
Britain, and one to 7000 i n Russia. The car made it possible for people to
buy a house in the suburbs, which further boos ted house building. It also
stimulated the growth of hundreds of other smaller businesses, ranging from
hot-dog stands and advertising billboards to petrol stations and holiday
resorts.
Think!
1  Study the information and sources on this page and make a list
of the ways in which the motor industry changed. Use the
following headings:
    •  Jobs people did
    •  Other industries
    •  Where people lived
    •  How people lived
2  Discuss: Was the car industry more important than other factors
in changing America?
Mass consumption
It is no good pr oducing lots of goods  if people don’t buy them. Mass
production requires MASS CONSUMPTION. So, the big industries used
sophisticated sales and marketing techniques to get people to buy their goods .
New electrical companies such as Hoove r became household names. They
used the latest, most efficient techniques propos ed by the ‘Industrial
Efficiency Movement’.
•  Mass nationwide advertising had been used for the first time in the USA
during the war to get Americans to support the war effort. Many of the
advertisers who had learned their skills in wartime PROPAGANDA now set
up agencies to sell cars, cigarettes, clothing and other consumer items.
Poster advertisements, radio advertisements and travelling salesmen
encouraged Americans to spend.
•  There was a huge growth in the number of MAIL-ORDER companies. People
across America, especially in remote areas, could buy the new consumer
goods  from catalogues. In 1928 n early one-third of Americans bought
goods  from Sears, Roebuck and Company catalogue. This greatly
expanded the market for products.
•  Even if they did not have the money, people could bor row it easily. Or they
could take advantage of the new ‘Buy now, pay later’ HIRE PURCHASE
schemes. Eight out of ten radios and six out of ten cars were bought on
CREDIT. Before the war, people expected to save up until they could afford
something. Now they could buy on credit.
•  A brand-new kind of shop emerged – the chain store – the same shop
selling the same products all across the USA.
This all worked very well as you can see from Figure 5.
FIGURE 5
Sales of consumer goods, 1915–30. Overall,
the output of American industry doubled in the
1920s.
A state of mind
One thing that runs through all the factors you have looked at so far is an
attitude or a state of mind. Most Americans believed that they had a right to
‘prosperity’. For many it was their main aim in life to have a nice house, a
good j ob and plenty to eat, and for their home to be filled with the latest
consumer goods . Consuming more and more was seen as part of being
American.
In earlier decades, thrift (being careful with money and saving ‘for a rainy
day’) had been seen as a good qu ality. In the 1920s  this was replaced by a
belief that spending money was a better quality.
There was confidence in the USA in the 1920s . Businesspeople had the
confidence to invest in the new industries, to experiment with new ideas and
to set up businesses and employ people. Ordinary Americans had confidence
to buy goods , sometimes on credit, because they were sure they could pay for
them, or to invest in industry itself by buying shares. Confidence is vital to
any economic boom .
FOCUS TASK 10.1
What factors caused the economic boom?
The diagram on the left shows you the main factors on which the
economic boom in the 1920s was based. Put a copy of the
diagram in the centre of a large piece of paper. Write notes to
summarise how each factor contributed to the boom using pages
298–303.
Revision Tip
So have you got five or more factors which explain the boom? If
so:
•  choose two factors you think were connected and practise
explaining how they were connected
•  decide which one you think is the most important (or if you think
the boom cannot be explained that way, say why).
Problems in the farming industry
While many Americans were enjoying the boom , farmers most definitely
were not. Total US farm income droppe d from $22 bi llion in 1919 t o just
$13 bi llion in 1928. There were a number of reasons why farming had such
problems.
•  Declining exports: After the war, Europe imported far less food f rom the
USA. This was partly because Europe was poor , and it was partly a
response to US tariffs which stoppe d Europe from exporting to the USA
(see page 300).
•  New competitors: Farmers were also struggling against competition from
the highly efficient Canadian wheat producers. All of this came at a time
when the popu lation of the USA was actually falling and there were fewer
mouths to feed.
•  Over-production: Underlying all these problems was OVER-PRODUCTION.
From 1900 t o 1920, w hile farming was doing well, more and more land
was being farmed. Improved machinery, especially the combine harvester,
and improved fertilisers made US agriculture extremely efficient. The
result was that by 1920 i t was producing surpluses of wheat which nobody
wanted.
•  Falling prices: Prices plummeted as desperate farmers tried to sell their
produce. In 1921 a lone, most farm prices fell by 50 pe r cent. Hundreds of
rural banks collapsed in the 1920s  and there were five times as many farm
bankruptcies as there had been in the 1900s  and 1910s .
SOURCE 6
A cartoon showing the situation faced by
American farmers in the 1920s.
Source Analysis
1  Do you think the cartoonist who drew Source 6 is sympathetic
towards the farmer?
2  What is the cartoonist’s attitude towards the towns and cities?
Not all farmers were affected by these problems. Rich Americans wanted
fresh vegetables and fruit throughout the year. Shipments of lettuce to the
cities, for example, rose from 14,000 c rates in 1920 t o 52,000 i n 1928. But
for most farmers the 1920s  were a time of hardship.
This was a serious issue. About half of all Americans lived in rural areas,
mostly working on farms or in businesses that sold goods  to farmers.
Problems in farming therefore directly affected more than 60 m illion
Americans.
Six million rural Americans, mainly farm labourers, were forced off the land
in the 1920s . Many of these were unskilled workers who migrated to the
cities, where there was little demand for their labour. African Americans
were particularly badly hit. They had always done the least skilled jobs in
the rural areas. As they lost their jobs on the farms, three-quarters of a
million of them became unemployed.
Revision Tip
Falling prices, Over-production, New competitors, Declining exports
– take the first letter of each and you have FOND (this is called a
mnemonic). Make sure you can explain why each factor was a
problem for the farming industry.
It is no surprise that farming communities were the fiercest critics of the
‘laissez-faire’ policies of the Republican Party.
FOCUS TASK 10.2
Why did agriculture not share in the prosperity?
Write a 200-word caption explaining the message of Source 6.
Refer to details in the source but also use the information in the
text to explain the details, for example, the reasons why the farmer
might be looking enviously (or angrily) at the factories, or the
events that might have led to his farm being for sale.
Problems in traditional industries
You have already seen how the farmers – a very large group in American
society – did not share in the prosperity of the 1920s . But they were not
alone. Workers in many older industries did not benefit much either.
The coal industry was a big employer but it began to struggle. First, like
farming there was over-production. This reduced the price of coal and
therefore profits. At the same time coal pow er was losing out to new pow er
sources like electricity and oil. Although electricity producers used coal to
generate electricity, the new generating technology was highly efficient so it
did not need much coal to produce a lot of energy. Manufacturers were either
switching to electricity or oil, or used more efficient machinery which used
less coal. The same pattern could be seen in homes where improved boi lers
gave users the same amount of heat with less coal.
FIGURE 7
A comparison of the growth of profits and the
growth of average earnings.
Other industries such as leather, textiles and shoe-making also struggled.
They were protected from competition with foreign imports by tariffs.
However, they were not growth markets. They also suffered from
competition from industries which used new man-made materials and were
often mechanised. In the TRADITIONAL INDUSTRIES generally growth was slow
and profits were gradually declining. Workers in these industries lost their
jobs as processes became increasingly mechanised. Skilled workers
struggled to compete against both machinery and cheap labour in the southern
states. Even if workers in these industries did get a pay rise, their wages did
not increase at the same rate as company profits or dividends paid to
shareholders (see Figure 7).
In 1928 t here was a strike in the coal industry in North Carolina, where the
male workers were paid only $18 a nd women $9 for a 70-hour week, at a
time when $48 pe r week was considered to be the minimum required for a
decent life. In fact, for the majority of Americans wages remained well
below that figure. It has been estimated that 42 pe r cent of Americans lived
below the pove rty line – they did not have the money needed to pay for
essentials such as food, c lothing, housing and heating for their families.
FIGURE 8
The distribution of income in 1925.
SOURCE 9
A hunger march in Washington during the
brief recession which hit some industries in
1921–22.
Revision Tip
Ensure you know an example of industries that were harmed by
each of: electrification; oil; declining sales; declining profits.
Unemployment
What’s more, throughout this period unemployment remained a problem. The
growth in industry in the 1920s  did not create many new jobs. Industries
were growing by electrifying or mechanising production. The same number
of people (around 5 pe r cent) were unemployed at the peak of the boom  in
1929 a s in 1920. Yet the amount of goods  produced had dou bled. These
millions of unemployed Americans were not sharing in the boom . They
included many poor  whites, but an even greater proportion of African
American and Hispanic people and other members of the USA’s large
immigrant communities.
The plight of the poor  was desperate for the individuals concerned. But it
was also damaging to American industry. The boom  of the 1920s  was a
consumer-led boom , which means that it was led by ordinary families buying
things for their homes. But with so many families too poor  to buy such goods ,
the demand for them was likely to begin to tail off. However, Republican
policy remained not to interfere, and this included doi ng nothing about
unemployment or pove rty.
FOCUS TASK 10.3
Did all Americans share in the boom?
In 1928 a new Republican president, Herbert Hoover, was elected.
He said:
SOURCE 10
One of the oldest and perhaps the noblest of human activities
[aims] has been the abolition of poverty … we in America today
are nearer to the final triumph over poverty than ever before in
the history of any land.
Herbert Hoover.
Gather evidence from pages 304–306 to contest Hoover’s claim.
Write a paper setting out in detail:
•  how badly off some farmers have become since the war
•  why farmers are poor and how Republican policies have
contributed to this
•  why workers in older industries are suffering and what has
happened to their wages (give an example)
•  why immigrant workers and African Americans are not well off.
Try to use specific examples such as Chicago in the 1920s.
Case study: Chicago in the 1920s
Chicago was one of America’s biggest cities. It was the centre of the steel,
meat and clothing industries, which employed many unskilled workers. Such
industries had busy and slack periods. In slack periods the workers would be
‘seasonally unemployed’. Many of these workers were Polish or Italian
immigrants, or African American migrants from the southern United States.
How far did they share in the prosperity of the 1920s ?
•  Only 3 pe r cent of semi-skilled workers owned a car. Compare that with
richer areas where 29 pe r cent owned a car.
•  Workers in Chicago didn’t like to buy large items on credit. They preferred
to save for when they might not have a job. Many bought smaller items on
credit, such as radios.
•  The poor  whites did not use the new chain stores which had revolutionised
shopping in the 1920s . Nearly all of them were in middle-class districts.
Poorer white industrial workers preferred to shop at the local grocer’s
where the owner was more flexible and gave them credit.
Key Question Summary
How far did the US economy boom in the 1920s?
1  The 1920s saw unprecedented growth in mass consumption in
the USA. People bought a vast range of new products which
changed the way people lived their lives.
2  The period saw dynamic business growth and prosperity with the
creation of vast new cities, characterised by skyscr apers, and
new systems of transport to link towns and cities.
3  The boom was encouraged by the policies of the Republican
Party which believed in laissez-faire, low taxes and protective
tariffs.
4  It was also underpinned by the development of new industries
using new materials and innovative production techniques,
especially mass production.
5  The motor car was particularly important, changing the American
way of life and stimulating other industries.
6  Large sections of American society did not benefit to the same
degree from prosperity including farmers and farm labourers –
farming in the 1920s was very depressed through a combination
of over-production and environmental problems.
7  Older industries such as coal or leather suffered because of
competition from new materials such as oil and plastics and
because their methods and machinery became outdated.
Revision Tip
•  Choose two points about Chicago which you could use in a
question about whether all Americans shared in the boom.
•  Explain to someone else how you would use those points.
10B How far did US society change in
the 1920s?
The USA in the Roaring Twenties
Town v. country
In 1920, f or the first time in American history, more Americans lived in
towns and cities than in the country. People flocked to them from all over the
USA. The growing city with its imposing skyline of skyscrapers was one of
the most pow erful symbols of 1920s  USA.
Throughout the 1920s  there was tension between rural USA and urban USA.
Certain rural states, particularly in the South, fought a rearguard action
against the ‘evil’ effects of the city throughout the 1920s , as you will see on
page 319.
FOCUS
The 1920s are often called the Roaring Twenties. For some it was
a time of riotous fun, loud music and wild enjoyment. However, for
others it was a time of hardship, intolerance and fear of moral
decline. In this section you will examine these contrasts and the
conflicts that resulted from them.
Focus Points
•  What were the ‘Roaring Twenties’?
•  How widespread was intolerance in US society?
•  Why was Prohibition introduced, and then later repealed?
•  How far did the role of women change during the 1920s?
SOURCE 1
The Builder, painted by Gerrit A Beneker in
the 1920s. Beneker had worked for the US
Government producing propaganda posters
in the First World War.
Source Analysis
Study Source 1. Is the artist positive or negative about the building
boom taking place in US cities? How can you tell?
FIGURE 2
The change in the USA’s urban and rural
populations, 1900–40.
Entertainment
The term ‘ROARING TWENTIES’ is particularly associated with entertainment
and changing morality. During the 1920s  working wages hours fell and wages
rose for most Americans. A lot of this spare time and money was channelled
into entertainment, creating a huge leisure industry.
Radio
Almost everyone in the USA listened to the radio. Most households had their
own set. In poor er districts where not all people could afford a radio, they
shared. By 1930 t here was one radio for every two to three households in the
poorer districts of Chicago. The choice of programmes grew quickly. In
August 1921 t here was only one licensed radio station in America. By the
end of 1922 t here were 508 of  them. By 1929 t he new network NBC was
making $150 m illion a year.
Jazz
The radio gave much greater access to new music. Jazz music became an
obsession among young people. African Americans who moved from the
country to the cities had brought jazz and blues music with them. Blues music
was particularly popu lar among African Americans, while jazz captured the
imagination of both white and African American youth.
Such was the pow er of jazz music that the 1920s  became known as the Jazz
Age. Along with jazz went new dances such as the Charleston, and new
styles of behaviour which were summed up in the image of the FLAPPER, a
woman who wore short dresses and make-up and who smoked in public. One
writer said that the ideal flapper was ‘expensive and about nineteen’.
The older generation saw jazz and everything associated with it as a
corrupting influence on the young people of the USA. The newspapers and
magazines printed articles analysing the influence of jazz (see Source 3).
SOURCE 3
(i) Jazz employs primitive rhythms which excite the baser human
instincts.
(ii) Jazz music causes drunkenness. Reason and reflection are lost
and the actions of the persons are directed by the stronger
animal passions.
Comments on jazz music in articles in the
1920s.
Source Analysis
What do you think the writers in Source 3 mean by ‘the baser human
instincts’ and ‘the stronger animal passions’?
Sport
Sport was another boom  area. Baseball became a big money sport with
legendary teams like the New York Yankees and Boston Red Sox. Baseball
stars like Babe Ruth became national figures. Boxing was also a very
popu lar sport, with heroes like world heavyweight champion Jack Dempsey.
Millions of Americans listened to sporting events on the radio.
Cinema
In a small suburb outside Los Angeles, called HOLLYWOOD, a major film
industry was developing. All-year-round sunshine meant that the studios
could produce large numbers of films or ‘movies’. New stars like Charlie
Chaplin and Buster Keaton made audiences roar with laughter, while
Douglas Fairbanks thrilled them in daring adventure films. Until 1927 a ll
movies were silent. In 1927 t he first ‘talkie’ was made.
During the 1920s  movies became a multi-billion dollar business and it was
estimated that, by the end of the decade, a hundred million cinema tickets
were being sold each week. Even the poor  joined the movie craze. Working
people in Chicago spent more than half of their leisure budget on movies.
Even those who were so poor  that they were getting Mothers’ Aid Assistance
went often. It only cost ten or twenty cents to see a movie.
Morals
Source 5 reflects the gulf which many people felt had ope ned up in moral
attitudes. In the generation before the war, sex had still been a taboo s ubject.
After the war it became a major concern of tabloid newspapers, Hollywood
films, and everyday conversation. Scott Fitzgerald, on e of a celebrated new
group of young American writers who had served in the First World War,
said: ‘None of the mothers had any idea how casually their daughters were
accustomed to be kissed.’
The cinema quickly discovered the selling pow er of sex. The first cinema
star to be sold on sex appeal was Theda Bara who, without any acting talent,
made a string of wildly successful films with titles like Forbidden Path and
When a W oman Si ns. Clara Bow was sold as the ‘It’ girl. Everybody  knew
that ‘It’ meant ‘sex’. Hollywood t urned out dozens of films a month about
‘It’, such as Up in Mabel’s Room, Her Purchase Price and A Shoc king
Night. Male stars too, s uch as Rudolph Valentino, were presented as sex
symbols. Women were said to faint at the very sight of him as a half-naked
Arab prince in The Sheik (1921) .
SOURCE 4
An advertisement for The Jazz Bride, a
movie released in 1928.
Source Analysis
Study Source 4. Do you think it is more useful as evidence about
movies, jazz or morals? Make sure you can explain your answer.
Today these films would be considered very tame indeed, bu t at the time they
were considered very daring. The more conservative rural states were
worried by the deluge of sex-obsessed films, and 36 s tates threatened to
introduce CENSORSHIP legislation. Hollywood r esponded with its own
censorship code which ensured that, while films might still be full of sex, at
least the sinful characters were not allowed to get away with it!
Meanwhile, in the real world, contraceptive advice was openly available for
the first time. Sex outside marriage was much more common than in the past,
although probably more people talked about it and went to films about it than
actually did it!
SOURCE 5
It seems to be accepted nowadays that our young people are going
to the devil. Press, pulpit, and publicist are agreed that youth is
wild and getting wilder. The college boy and his flapper friend, it is
charged, drink, pet, and are disrespectful to their elders, while the
neighbourhood gangster, aided by his youthful sweetie and
stimulated by the false courage of heroin or cocaine, robs and
murders with casual calmness long before he is out of his teens.
Most of this lamentation, of course, is based on theory and not on
fact. Those who indulge in it have read in the papers of a few
sensational cases … The Children’s Bureau of the United States
Bureau of Labour recently undertook to throw a little light, of a
really scientific character, on this question. If youth is as wild as is
represented, and the wildness extends through all classes, the
results certainly ought to be reflected in the records of the juvenile
courts and the institutions in which delinquents are detained.
Accordingly, a careful study was made of the statistics dealing with
the subject. The figures investigated included delinquency rates in
fourteen of the leading cities of the United States. … In nearly all
these fourteen cities, the delinquency rates per 1,000 children of
“delinquency age” were decidedly lower in 1924 or 1925 than in
1915. Youth may really be wild, in a fashion which does not get
itself reflected in the delinquency and prison statistics. In so far,
however, as the complaint has been made of youthful criminals as
a new phenomenon, it is clearly without foundation.
Extract from the New-York-based liberal
journal The New Republic, 1926.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe at least two features of the Roaring
Twenties.
•  Ideally, try to make sure you can also explain why each feature
was new to America.
The car
The motor car was one factor that tended to make all the other features of the
1920s  mentioned above  more possible. Cars helped the cities to grow by
opening up the suburbs. They carried their owners to and from their
entertainments. Cars carried boy friends and girlfriends beyond the moral
gaze of their parents and they took Americans to an increasing range of
sporting events, beach holidays, shopping trips, picnics in the country, or
simply on visits to their family and friends.
ACTIVITY
1  Draw a mind map to summarise the features of the Roaring
Twenties. You can get lots of ideas from the text on pages 307–
309, but remember that other factors may also be relevant; for
example, material on the economy (pages 298–306). You can
also add to your mind map as you find out about the period,
particularly women (pages 310–311) and Prohibition (pages
320–322).
2  Think about the way these new developments in the 1920s
affected people’s lives. Choose three aspects of the Roaring
Twenties that you think would have had the greatest impact and
explain why. Compare your choices with others in your class.
Women in 1920s USA
Women formed half of the popu lation of the USA and their lives were as
varied as those of men. It is therefore difficult to generalise. However,
before the First World War middle-class women in the USA, like those in
Britain, were expected to lead restricted lives. They had to wear very
restrictive clothes and behave politely. They were expected not to wear
make-up. Their relationships with men were strictly controlled. They had to
have a chaperone with them when they went out with a boyfriend. They were
expected not to take part in sport or to smoke in public. In most states they
could not vote. Most women were expected to be housewives. Very few paid
jobs were open to women. Most working women were in lower-paid jobs
such as cleaning, dressmaking and secretarial work. In rural USA there were
particularly tight restrictions owing to the Churches’ traditional attitude to the
role of women.
SOURCE 6
A school teacher in 1905.
In the 1920s , many of these things began to change, especially for urban and
middle-class women, for a range of reasons.
•  Impact of war When the USA joined the war in 1917, s ome women were
taken into the war industries, giving them experience of skilled factory
work for the first time.
•  The vote In 1920 t hey got the vote in all states.
•  The car Through the 1920s , they shared the liberating effects of the car.
•  Housework Their dom estic work was made easier (in theory) by new
electrical goods  such as vacuum cleaners and washing machines.
•  Behaviour For younger urban women many of the traditional roles of
behaviour were eased as well. Women wore more daring clothes. They
smoked in public and drank with men, in public. They went out with men,
in cars, without a chaperone. They kissed in public.
Think!
1  Compare the clothes of the women in Sources 6 and 7. Write a
detailed description of the differences between them.
2  Flappers were controversial figures in the 1920s. List as many
reasons as possible for this.
Employment
In urban areas more women took on jobs – pa rticularly middle-class women.
Typically, these jobs were created by the new industries. There were 10
million women in jobs in 1929, 24 pe r cent more than in 1920. With money
of their own, working women became the particular target of advertising.
Even women who did not earn their own money were increasingly seen as
the ones who took decisions about whether to buy new items for the home.
There is evidence that women’s role in choosing cars triggered Ford, in
1925, t o make them available in colours other than black.
Choices
Films and novels also exposed women to a much wider range of role models.
Millions of women a week saw films with sexy or daring heroines as well as
other films that showed women in a more traditional role. The newspaper,
magazine and film industries found that sex sold much better than anything
else.
Women were less likely to stay in unhappy marriages. In 1914 t here were
100,000 di vorces; in 1929 t here were twice as many.
SOURCE 7
Flappers, identified by short skirts, bobbed
hair, bright clothes and lots of make-up, were
the extreme example of liberated urban
women.
Limitations
It might seem to you as if everything was changing, and for young, middle-
class women living in cities a lot was changing in the 1920s . However, this
is only part of the story.
Take work, for example. Women were still paid less than men, even when
they did the same job. One of the reasons women’s employment increased
when men’s did not was that women were cheaper employees.
In politics as well, women in no way achieved equality with men. They may
have been given the vote but it did not give them access to pol itical pow er.
Political parties wanted women’s votes, but they didn’t particularly want
women as political candidates as they considered them ‘unelectable’.
Although many women, such as Eleanor Roosevelt (see Profile), had a high
public standing, only a handful of women had been elected by 1929.
SOURCE 8
It is wholly confusing to read the advertisements [for] … devices
which should lighten the chores of women in the home. On the
whole the middle classes do their own housework …
Women who live on farms … besides caring for their children,
washing the clothes, caring for the home and cooking … [also]
labour in the fields … help milk the cows …
The largest group of American women are the families of … the
vast army of unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled workers. The
wages of these men are on the whole so small [that] wives must do
double duty – caring for the children and the home and toiling on
the outside as wage earners.
Doris E. Fleischman, America as Americans
See It, F.J. Ringel (ed.), 1932.
How did women respond?
From films of the 1920s  such as Forbidden Path (see page 308) you would
think that all American women were living passionate lives full of steamy
romance. However, novels and films of the period can be misleading.
Women certainly did watch such films, in great numbers. But there is no
evidence that the majority of women began to copy what they saw in the
1920s . In fact, the evidence suggests that the reaction of many women was
one of oppos ition and outrage. There was a strong conservative element in
American society. A combination of traditional religion and old country
values kept most American women in a much more restricted role than young
urban women enjoyed. For most, raising a family and maintaining a good
home for their husbands were their main priorities.
SOURCE 9
Though a few young upper middle-class women in the cities talked
about throwing off the older conventions – they were the flappers –
most women stuck to more traditional attitudes concerning ‘their
place’ … most middle-class women concentrated on managing the
home … Their daughters, far from taking to the streets against
sexual discrimination, were more likely to prepare for careers as
mothers and housewives. Millions of immigrant women and their
daughters … also clung to traditions that placed men firmly in
control of the family … Most American women concentrated on
making ends meet or setting aside money to purchase the new
gadgets that offered some release from household drudgery.
J.T. Patterson, America in the Twentieth
Century, 1999.
Source Analysis
How does Source 9 contrast with the image of women given by
Source 7?
FOCUS TASK 10.4
How far did the roles of women change during the 1920s?
You are going to write a script to continue this conversation. Aim
for six more scenes: three for each woman. To get you started,
draw up a table with two columns headed:
•  Roaring Twenties
•  Not so Roaring Twenties.
In each column summarise the points each speaker might make to
support their view of the 1920s.
Profile
Eleanor Roosevelt
•  Born 1884 into a wealthy family.
•  Married Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1905.
•  Heavily involved in:
    –  League of Women Voters
    –  Women’s Trade Union League
    –  Women’s City Club (New York)
    –  New York State Democratic Party (Women’s Division).
•  Work concentrated on:
    –  uniting New York Democrats
    –  public housing for low-income workers
    –  birth control information
    –  better conditions for women workers.
Revision Tip
Select two changes for women in this period. Make sure you can
describe both of them fully. Then select two ways in which life did
not change for women and describe those.
Intolerance towards immigrants
At the same time as some young Americans were experiencing liberation,
others were facing intolerance and racism.
The vast majority of Americans were either immigrants or descendants of
recent immigrants. Figure 11 shows you the ethnic background of the main
groups. As you can see from Figure 10, IMMIGRATION to the USA was at an
all-time high from 1901 t o 1910. Immigrants were flooding in, particularly
Jews from eastern Europe and Russia who were fleeing persecution, and
people from Italy who were fleeing pove rty. Many Italian immigrants did not
intend to settle in the USA, but hoped to make money to take back to their
families in Italy.
FIGURE 10
Immigration to the USA, 1861–1910.
The United States had always prided itself on being a ‘melting pot’. In
theory, individual groups lost their ethnic identity and blended together with
other groups to become just ‘Americans’. In practice, however, this wasn’t
always the case. In the USA’s big cities the more established immigrant
groups – Irish Americans, French Canadians and German Americans –
competed for the best jobs and the best available housing. These groups
tended to look dow n on the more recent eastern European and Italian
immigrants. These in turn had nothing but contempt for African Americans
and Mexicans, who were almost at the bottom of the scale.
FIGURE 11
The ethnic background of Americans in the
early twentieth century.
The Red Scare
In the 1920s  these racist attitudes towards immigrants were made worse by
an increased fear of Bolshevism or COMMUNISM. The USA watched with
alarm as Russia became communist after the Russian Revolution of 1917. It
feared that many of the more recent immigrants from eastern Europe and
Russia were bringing similar RADICAL ideas with them to the USA. This
reaction was called the RED SCARE.
In 1919 A mericans saw evidence all around them to confirm their fears.
There was a wave of disturbances. Some 400,000 A merican workers went
on strike. Even the police in Boston went on strike and looters and thieves
roamed the city. There were race riots in 25 towns.
SOURCE 12
The blaze of revolution is eating its way into the homes of the
American workman, licking at the altars of the churches, leaping
into the belfry of the school house, crawling into the sacred corners
of American homes, seeking to replace the marriage vows with
libertine laws, burning up the foundations of society.
Mitchell Palmer, US Attorney General,
speaking in 1920.
Today, most historians argue that the strikes were caused by economic
hardship. However, many prominent Americans in the 1920s  saw the strikes
as the dangerous signs of communist interference. Fear of communism
combined with prejudice against immigrants was a pow erful mix.
SOURCE 13
The steamship companies haul them over to America and as soon
as they step off the ships the problem of the steamship companies
is settled, but our problem has only begun – Bolshevism, red
anarchy, black-handers and kidnappers, challenging the authority
and integrity of our flag … Thousands come here who will never
take the oath to support our constitution and become citizens of the
USA. They pay allegiance to some other country while they live
upon the substance of our own. They fill places that belong to the
wage earning citizens of America … They are of no service
whatever to our people … They constitute a menace and a danger
to us every day.
Republican Senator Heflin speaking in 1921 in
a debate over whether to limit immigration.
The fears were not totally unjustified. Many immigrants in the USA did hold
radical political beliefs. Anarchists published pamphlets and distributed
them widely in American cities, calling for the overthrow of the government.
In April 1919 a  bom b planted in a church in Milwaukee killed ten people. In
May, bom bs were posted to 36 pr ominent Americans. In June more bom bs
went off in seven US cities, and one almost succeeded in killing Mitchell
Palmer, the US Attorney General. All those known to have radical political
beliefs were rounded up. They were generally immigrants and the evidence
against them was often flimsy. J. Edgar Hoove r, a clerk appointed by Palmer,
built up files on 60,000 s uspects and in 1919–20 a round 10,000 i ndividuals
were informed that they were to be deported from the USA.
SOURCE 14
A 1919 cartoon entitled ‘Come On!’ showing
attitudes to communism in the USA. The
character in the black suit looks like Trotsky
and has ‘Revolution maker’ written on his
chest. The piece of paper says ‘Propaganda
for US’.
Source Analysis
Look at Sources 12–14. Do they tell historians more about
communists or the enemies of communism? Explain your answer.
Think!
Work in pairs.
1  One of you collect evidence to show that the Red Scare was the
result of the fear of communism.
2  The other collect evidence to show that the Red Scare was the
result of prejudice and intolerance.
3  Now try to come up with a definition of the Red Scare that
combines both of your views.
Palmer discovered that these purges were popu lar, so he tried to use the fear
of revolution to build up his own political support and run for president.
Trade unionists, African Americans, Jews, Catholics and almost all minority
groups found themselves accused of being communists. In the end, however,
Palmer caused his own dow nfall. He predicted that a Red Revolution would
begin in May 1920. When nothing happened, the papers began to make fun of
him and officials in the Justice Department who were sickened by Palmer’s
actions undermined him. Secretary of Labor Louis Post examined Palmer’s
case files and found that only 556 ou t of the thousands of cases brought had
any basis in fact.
Revision Tip
•  Make sure you can describe two attacks that sparked off the
Red Scare 1919–20.
•  Make sure you can explain at least one reason for Palmer’s
downfall.
•  Practise explaining to someone else why the Sacco and Vanzetti
case received so much publicity.
Sacco and Vanzetti
Two high-profile victims of the Red Scare were Italian Americans Nicola
Sacco and Bartolomeo Vanzetti. They were arrested in 1920 on  suspicion of
armed robbe ry and murder. It quickly emerged that they were self-confessed
anarchists. Anarchists hated the American system of government and
believed in destroying it by creating social disorder. Their trial became less
a trial for murder, more a trial of their radical ideas. The prosecution relied
heavily on racist slurs about their Italian origins, and on stirring up fears
about their radical beliefs. The judge at the trial said that although Vanzetti
‘may not actually have committed the crime attributed to him he is
nevertheless morally culpable [to blame] because he is the enemy of our
existing institutions’.
Sacco and Vanzetti were convicted on flimsy evidence. A leading lawyer of
the time said: ‘Judge Thayer is … full of prejudice. He has been carried
away by fear of Reds which has captured about 90 pe r cent of the American
people.’ After six years of legal appeals, Sacco and Vanzetti were executed
in 1927, t o a storm of protest around the world from both radicals and
moderates who saw how unjustly the trial had been conducted. Fifty years
later, they were pardoned.
Immigration quotas
In 1924 t he Government introduced a quota system that ensured that the
largest proportion of immigrants was from north-west Europe (mainly
British, Irish and German). From a high point of more than a million
immigrants a year between 1901 a nd 1910, by  1929 t he number arriving in
the USA had fallen to 150,000 pe r year. No Asians were allowed in at all.
The experience of African Americans
African Americans had long been part of America’s history. The first
Africans had been brought to the USA as slaves by white settlers in the
seventeenth century. By the time slavery was ended in the nineteenth century,
there were more African Americans than white people in the southern United
States. White governments, fearing the pow er of African Americans,
introduced many laws to control their freedom. They could not vote. They
were denied access to good j obs and to worthwhile education, and well into
the twentieth century they suffered great pove rty.
SOURCE 15
A lad whipped with branches until his back was ribboned flesh … a
white girl, divorcee, beaten into unconsciousness in her home; a
naturalised foreigner flogged until his back was pulp because he
married an American woman; a negro lashed until he sold his land
to a white man for a fraction of its value.
R.A. Patton, writing in Current History in
1929, describes the victims of Klan violence
in Alabama.
Source Analysis
What does Source 15 tell you about the motives of Klan violence?
The Ku Klux Klan
The KU KLUX KLAN was a white supremacy movement. It used violence to
intimidate African Americans. It had been in decline, but was revived after
the release of the film The Birth of a Nation in 1915. The film was set in the
1860s , just after the Civil War. It glorified the Klan as defenders of decent
American values against renegade African Americans and corrupt white
businessmen. President Wilson had it shown in the White House. He said: ‘It
is like writing history with lightning. And my only regret is that it is all so
terribly true.’ With such support from prominent figures, the Klan became a
powerful political force in the early 1920s .
Jim Crow
African Americans throughout the South faced fierce racism. In theory, they
became free in 1865 w hen the end of the American Civil War ended slavery.
In reality, however, white supremacy remained through the discriminatory set
of laws and practices which became known as ‘Jim Crow’. African
Americans were prevented from voting by literacy tests, intimidation and
violence. They were discriminated against in employment and education.
Even their streets were rebuilt to remind them that they were second-class
citizens. During the 1920s  thousands of monuments were erected to white
Confederate Civil War soldiers and commanders. This was 60 y ears after the
war had ended and it was a clear attempt to remind African Americans who
was in charge. As this book  is being printed in 2018 t he USA is only just
beginning to tackle the issue of Confederate statues.
Factfile
The Ku Klux Klan
•  Formed in the 1850s by former soldiers after the American CIVIL
WAR with the aim of keeping whites in control.
•  It used parades, beatings, lynchings and other violent methods to
intimidate African Americans. It also attacked Jews, Catholics
and foreign immigrants.
•  It was strongest in the Midwest and rural South, where working-
class whites competed with African Americans for unskilled jobs.
•  It declined in the late nineteenth century but was started up again
in 1915. It spread rapidly in the early 1920s, managing to get
Klansmen elected into positions of political power.
•  By 1924 it had 4.5 million members.
•  Oregon and Oklahoma had governors who belonged to the Klan.
The Klan was especially dominant in Indiana.
•  The Klan declined after 1925. One of its leaders, Grand Wizard
David Stephenson, was convicted of a vicious sexually motivated
murder. He turned informer and the corruption of the Klan
became common knowledge.
‘Strange Fruit’
African Americans faced violence if they stood u p for themselves and they
often faced violence even when they had don e nothing at all. For example, in
1930 J ames Cameron, aged sixteen, was arrested with two other African
American men on suspicion of the murder of a white man and the rape of a
white woman. They were in prison in Marion, Indiana. A mob arrived
intending to LYNCH them (hang them without trial). The mob br oke dow n the
doors of the jail, dragged out the two other men and hanged them, as you can
see from the photograph in Source 16. Miraculously Cameron was spared.
He still does not know what saved him. The crowd had the rope round his
neck before they suddenly stoppe d and let him limp back to the door  of the
jail. He called it ‘a miraculous intervention’. The photograph in Source 16
became very well known and inspired a New York writer, Abel Meeropol,
to write a poem he called ‘Bitter Fruit’ (referring to the lynched men), later
changed to ‘Strange Fruit’.
SOURCE 16
The scene outside the jail in Marion, Indiana.
Abram Smith and Thomas Shipp have already
been lynched.
Source Analysis
1  Describe the scene you can see in Source 16 as though you were
reporting it on the radio.
2  What does Source 16 reveal about attitudes towards racial
violence at this time in the USA?
Cameron’s experience was not unusual. Thousands of African Americans
were murdered by lynching in this period. Many reports describe appalling
atrocities at which whole families, including young children, clapped and
cheered. It is one of the most shameful aspects of the USA at this time.
Faced by such intimidation, discrimination and pove rty, many African
Americans left the rural South and moved to the cities of the northern USA.
Through the 1920s  the African American popu lation of both Chicago and
New York doubled: New York’s from 150,000 t o 330,000 a nd Chicago’s
from 110,000 t o 230,000.
FOCUS TASK 10.5
What caused prejudice and intolerance in the 1920s?
On pages 312–316 you have seen several different causes of
prejudice and intolerance: politics; race; religion.
1  Create some cards and put one of these headings on each card.
Now add some examples of each factor from what you have
read on pages 312–316. Add other cards if you think there are
factors that we have not included.
2  Arrange the cards in what you think is their order of importance
for causing prejudice or intolerance. See if others in your class
agree with you.
Improvements
In the north, African Americans had a better chance of getting good j obs and
a good e ducation. For example, Howard University was an exclusively
African American institution for higher education.
In both Chicago and New York, there was a small but growing African
American middle class. There was a successful ‘black CAPITALIST’
movement, encouraging African Americans to set up businesses. In Chicago
they ran a successful BOYCOTT of the city’s chain stores, protesting that they
would not shop there unless African American staff were employed. By 1930
almost all the shops in the South Side belt where African Americans lived
had black employees.
There were internationally famous African Americans, such as the singer and
actor Paul Robeson (see Profile). The popu larity of jazz made many African
American musicians into high-profile media figures. The African American
neighbourhood of  Harlem in New York became the centre of the Harlem
Renaissance. Here musicians and singers made Harlem a centre of creativity
and a magnet for white customers in the bars and clubs. African American
artists flourished in this atmosphere, as did African American writers. The
poet Langston Hughes wrote about the lives of ordinary working-class
African Americans and the pove rty and problems they suffered. Countee
Cullen was another prominent poet who tried to tackle racism and pove rty. In
one famous poem (‘For A Lady I Know’) he tried to sum up attitudes of
wealthy white employees to their African American servants:
She even thinks that up in heaven, Her class lies late and s nores
While poor  black cherubs rise at seven, To do c elestial chores.
Profile
Paul Robeson
•  Born 1898, son of a church minister who had been a former
slave.
•  Went to Columbia University and passed his law exams with
honours in 1923.
•  As a black lawyer, it was almost impossible for him to find work,
so he became an actor – his big break was in the hit musical
‘Showboat’.
•  Visited Moscow in 1934 on a world tour and declared his
approval of communism saying ‘Here, for the first time in my life,
I walk in dignity.’
•  As a communist sympathiser, Robeson suffered in the USA – he
was banned from performing, suffered death threats and had his
passport confiscated.
•  He left the USA in 1958 to live in Europe, but returned in 1963.
Revision Tip
Racial prejudice is a major part of the course. You need to be able
to describe:
•  two examples of intolerance which African Americans faced
•  at least two ways African Americans responded (look at page
317 as well).
ACTIVITY
Read the profile of Paul Robeson. Imagine you are interviewing him
on the radio as he looks back on his life in the 1920s. Write three
questions you’d like to ask him.
The beginnings of the Civil Rights movement
African Americans also entered pol itics. W.E.B DuBois founded the
National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP). In
1919 i t had 300 br anches and around 90,000 m embers. It campaigned to end
racial segregation laws and to get laws passed against lynching.
Another important figure was Marcus Garvey. He founded the Universal
Negro Improvement Association (UNIA). Garvey urged African Americans
to be proud of their race and colour. The UNIA helped African Americans to
set up their own businesses. By the mid-1920s  there were UNIA grocery
stores, laundries and restaurants.
SOURCE 17
If I die in Atlanta my work shall only then begin … Look for me in
the whirlwind or the storm, look for me all around you, for, with
God’s grace, I shall come and bring with me countless millions of
black slaves who have died in America and the West Indies and
the millions in Africa to aid you in the fight for Liberty, Freedom and
Life.
Marcus Garvey’s last word’s before going to
jail in 1925.
Garvey set up a shipping line to support both UNIA businesses and his
scheme of helping African Americans to emigrate to Africa away from white
racism. Eventually, his businesses collapsed, pa rtly as a result of the hostility
of the authorities, particularly FBI director. J. Edgar Hoove r. Garvey’s
movement attracted ove r 1 million members at its height in 1921. One of
these was the Reverend Earl Little. He was beaten to death by Klan thugs in
the late 1920s , but his son went on to be the civil rights leader Malcolm X.
SOURCE 18
Marcus Garvey after his arrest.
Continuing inequality
Although important, these movements failed to change the USA dramatically.
Life expectancy for African Americans increased from 45 to 48 be tween
1900 a nd 1930, bu t for whites it increased from 54 to 59. Many African
Americans in the northern cities lived in great pove rty. In Harlem in New
York they lived in poor er housing than whites, yet paid higher rents. They had
poorer education and health services than whites. Large numbers of black
women worked as low-paid dom estic servants. Factories making cars
employed few blacks or operated a whites-only policy.
In Chicago African Americans suffered great prejudice from longer-
established white residents (see Source 19).
SOURCE 19
There is nothing in the make up of a negro, physically or mentally,
that should induce anyone to welcome him as a neighbour. The
best of them are unsanitary … ruin follows in their path. They are
as proud as peacocks, but have nothing of the peacock’s beauty …
Niggers are undesirable neighbours and entirely irresponsible and
vicious.
From the Chicago Property Owners’ Journal,
1920.
Revision Tip
Prepare your ideas ready for a question about how far life changed
for African Americans in the 1920s. Choose:
•  two points to help you explain how life improved
•  two points to help explain how it did not change or got worse.
In Chicago when African Americans attempted to use parks, playgrounds and
beaches in the Irish and Polish districts, they were set upon by gangs of
whites calling themselves ‘athletic clubs’. The result was that African
American communities in northern areas often became isolated ghettos.
Within the African American communities prejudice was also evident.
Middle-class African Americans who were restless in the ghettos tended to
blame newly arrived migrants from the South for intensifying white racism.
In Harlem, the presence of some 50,000 W est Indians was a source of inter-
racial tension. Many of them were better educated, more militant and prouder
of their colour than the newly arrived African Americans from the South.
Think!
James Cameron went on to found America’s Black Holocaust
Museum, which records the suffering of black African Americans
through American history. Write a 100-word summary for the
museum handbook of the ways in which the 1920s were a time of
change for African Americans.
‘The vanishing Americans’
The native Americans were the original settlers of the North American
continent. They almost disappeared as an ethnic group during the rapid
expansion of the USA during the nineteenth century – de clining from 1.5
million to around 250,000 i n 1920. Those who survived or who chose not to
leave their traditional way of life were forced to move to RESERVATIONS in
the Midwest.
SOURCE 20
Photograph of a native American, Charlie
Guardipee, and his family taken for a US
Government report of 1921. According to the
report Charlie Guardipee had twenty horses,
ten cattle, no chickens, no wheat, oats or
garden, and no sickness in the family.
In the 1920s  the Government became concerned about the treatment of native
Americans. Twelve thousand had served in the armed forces in the First
World War, which helped to change white attitudes to them. The Government
did a census in the 1920s  and a major survey in the late 1920s  which
revealed that most lived in extreme pove rty, with much lower life expectancy
than whites, that they were in worse health and had poor er education and
poorly paid jobs (if they were able to get a job at all). They suffered extreme
discrimination. They were quickly losing their land. Mining companies were
legally able to seize large areas of native American land. Many native
Americans who ow ned land were giving up the struggle to survive in their
traditional way and selling up.
Think!
Make two lists:
a)  evidence of prejudice and discrimination towards native
Americans
b)  evidence that the treatment of native Americans was improving
in the 1920s.
They were also losing their culture. Their children were sent to special
boarding schools. The aim of the schools was to ‘assimilate’ them into white
American culture. This involved trying to destroy the native Americans’
beliefs, traditions, dances and languages. In the 1920s  the native Americans
were referred to as ‘the vanishing Americans’.
However, the 1920s  were in some ways a turning point. In 1924 n ative
Americans were granted US citizenship and allowed to vot e for the first
time. In 1928 t he Merriam Report propos ed widespread improvement to the
laws relating to native Americans, and these reforms were finally introduced
under Roosevelt’s New Deal in 1934.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe:
•  at least two ways in which native Americans suffered in the
1920s
•  one improvement.
The Monkey Trial
While the Sacco and Vanzetti trial became a public demonstration of anti-
immigrant feelings, another trial in the 1920s  – the MONKEY TRIAL – be came
the focus of ill-feeling between rural and urban USA.
Most urban people in the 1920s  would have believed in Charles Darwin’s
theory of evolution. This says that over millions of years human beings
evolved from ape-like ancestors.
Many rural Americans, however, disagreed. They were very religious
people. They were mostly Protestants. They went to church regularly and
believed in the Bible. When the Bible told them that God m ade the world in
six days, and that on the sixth day He created human beings to be like Him,
they took the teachings literally. People with these views were known as
fundamentalists. They were particularly strong in the ‘Bible Belt’ states such
as Tennessee.
SOURCE 21
For nearly two hours … Mr Darrow [lawyer for the defendant]
goaded his opponent. [He] asked Mr Bryan if he really believed
that the serpent had always crawled on its belly because it tempted
Eve, and if he believed Eve was made from Adam’s rib … [Bryan’s]
face flushed under Mr Darrow’s searching words, and … when one
[question] stumped him he took refuge in his faith and either
refused to answer directly or said in effect: ‘The Bible states it; it
must be so.’
From the report of the Monkey Trial in the
Baltimore Evening Sun, July 1925.
At school, however, even in these states, most children were taught
evolution. Fundamentalists felt that this was undermining their own religion.
It seemed to be yet another example of the USA abandoning traditional
values in the headlong rush to modernise in the 1920s . They decided to roll
back the modern ideas and so, in six states, the fundamentalists led by
William Jennings Bryan managed to pass a law banning the teaching of
‘evolution’.
A biology teacher called John Scopes deliberately broke the law so that he
could be arrested and put his case against fundamentalism to the courts. The
best lawyers were brought in for both sides and in July 1925, i n the stifling
heat of a Tennessee courtroom, the USA’s traditionalists joined battle with its
modernists.
Think!
1  Why do you think the trial became known as the Monkey Trial?
2  In what ways did the trial show American intolerance of other
points of view?
The trial captured public imagination and the arguments on both sides were
widely reported in the press. Scopes was convicted of breaking the law, but
it was really American fundamentalism itself which was on trial – and it lost!
At the trial the anti-evolutionists were subjected to great mockery. Their
arguments were publicly ridiculed and their spokesman Bryan, who claimed
to be an expert on religion and science, was shown to be ignorant and
confused. After the trial, the anti-evolution lobby  was weakened.
Revision Tip
Try to summarise this page in three points:
•  a reason for the Monkey Trial
•  a description of the trial
•  the results of the trial.
FOCUS TASK 10.6
How widespread was intolerance in the 1920s?
You have looked at various examples of intolerance and prejudice
in the 1920s. Draw up a chart like this, and fill it in to summarise
the various examples.
Why was Prohibition introduced?
In the nineteenth century, in rural areas of the USA there was a very strong
‘TEMPERANCE’ movement. Members of temperance movements agreed not to
drink alcohol and also campaigned to get others to give up alcohol. Most
members of these movements were devout Christians who saw the damage
alcohol did to family life. They wanted to stop that damage.
SOURCE 22
Our nation can only be saved by turning the pure stream of country
sentiment and township morals to flush out the cesspools of cities
and so save civilisation from pollution.
A temperance campaigner speaking in 1917.
In the nineteenth century the two main movements were the Anti-Saloon
League and the Women’s Christian Temperance Union (see Sources 23 and
24). The temperance movements were so strong in some of the rural areas
that they persuaded their state governments to prohibit the sale of alcohol
within the state. Through the early twentieth century the campaign gathered
pace. It became a national campaign to prohibit (ban) alcohol throughout the
country. It acquired some very pow erful supporters. Leading industrialists
backed the movement, believing that workers would be more reliable if they
did not drink. Politicians backed it because it got them votes in rural areas.
By 1916, 21 s tates had banned saloons.
Supporters of PROHIBITION became known as ‘dries’. The dries brought some
powerful arguments to their case. They claimed that ‘3000 i nfants are
smothered yearly in bed, by  drunken parents’. The USA’s entry into the First
World War in 1917 boos ted the dries. Drinkers were accused of being
unpatriotic cowards. Most of the big breweries were run by German
immigrants who were portrayed as the enemy. Drink was linked to other
evils as well. After the Russian Revolution, the dries claimed that
Bolshevism thrived on drink and that alcohol led to lawlessness in the cities,
particularly in immigrant communities. Saloons were seen as dens of vice
that destroyed family life. The campaign became one of country values
against city values.
In 1917 t he movement had enough states on its side to propos e the Eighteenth
Amendment to the Constitution. This ‘prohibited the manufacture, sale or
transportation of intoxicating liquors’. It became law in January 1920 a nd is
known as the Volstead Act.
FOCUS TASK 10.7
Why was Prohibition introduced?
1  Make some cards to summarise the reasons why Prohibition
was introduced. You could include:
    •  race
    •  politics
    •  religion
    •  economics
    •  values
    •  patriotism
    •  health.
Note down examples of how each of these factors contributed to
the passing of Prohibition.
2  Decide which was most important and then compare your top
factor with your top factor for causing prejudice and intolerance
(see page 316).
SOURCE 23
A poster issued by the Anti-Saloon League in
1915.
SOURCE 24
A poster issued by the Women’s Christian
Temperance Union.
What was the impact of Prohibition?
Prohibition lasted from 1920 u ntil 1933. It is often said that Prohibition was
a total failure. This is not entirely correct. Levels of alcohol consumption fell
by about 30 pe r cent in the early 1920s  (see Figure 25). Prohibition gained
widespread approval in some states, particularly the rural areas in the
Midwest, although in urban states it was not popu lar (Maryland never even
introduced Prohibition). The Government ran information campaigns and
Prohibition agents arrested offenders (see Figure 26). Two of the most
famous agents were Isadore Einstein and his deputy Moe Smith. They made
4392 a rrests. Their raids were always low key. They would enter
speakeasies (illegal bars) and simply order a drink. Einstein had a special
flask hidden inside his waistcoat with a funnel attached. He preserved the
evidence by pouring his drink dow n the funnel and the criminals were caught!
Think!
1  Prohibition did not actually make it illegal to drink alcohol, only to
make or supply it. Why?
2  Is it possible to enforce any law when the population refuses to
obey it? Try to think of laws that affect you today.
FIGURE 25
Average alcohol consumption of Americans
(in US gallons) per year, 1905–40.
FIGURE 26
Activities of federal prohibition agents.
Source Analysis
Which source or figure on pages 320–321 is most useful to the
historian investigating the impact of Prohibition, or are they more
useful when taken together? Explain your answer.
Supply and demand
Despite the work of the agents, Prohibition proved impossible to enforce
effectively in the cities. Enforcement was underfinanced. There were not
enough agents – each agent was poor ly paid and was responsible for a huge
area. By far the biggest problem was that millions of Americans, particularly
in urban areas, were simply not prepared to obe y this law. So a vast network
of suppliers stepped in to meet the demand for illegal alcohol.
Bootleggers
The suppliers of illegal alcohol were called ‘bootleggers’. Some made vast
fortunes. About two-thirds of the illegal alcohol came from Canada. The vast
border between the USA and Canada was virtually impossible to patrol.
Other boot leggers brought in alcohol by sea. They would simply wait in the
waters outside US control until an oppor tunity to land their cargo presented
itself. One of the most famous was Captain McCoy, who specialised in the
finest Scotch whisky. This is where the phrase ‘the real McCoy’ comes from.
Stills
Illegal stills (short for distilleries) sprang up all over the USA as people
made their own illegal whisky – moonshine. The stills were a major fire
hazard and the alcohol they produced was frequently poisonous. Agents
seized ove r 280,000 of  these stills, but we have no clear way of knowing
how many were not seized.
Revision Tip
The main debate about Prohibition is why it failed. Even so it is
worth remembering one or two examples of its success.
Speakeasies
Most Americans had no need for their own still. They simply went to their
favourite speakeasy. By 1925 t here were more speakeasies in American
cities than there had been saloons in 1919. Izzy Einstein filed a report to his
superiors on how easy it was to find alcohol after arriving in a new city.
Here are the results:
•  Chicago: 21 m inutes
•  Atlanta: 17 m inutes
•  Pittsburg: 11 minutes
•  New Orleans: 35 s econds (he was offered a bottle of whisky by his taxi
driver when he asked where he could get a drink!)
The speakeasies were well supplied by boot leggers. Al Capone (see page
323) made around $60 m illion a year from his boot legging and speakeasies.
His view was that ‘Prohibition is a business. All I do is supply a public
demand.’ And the demand was huge.
SOURCE 27
Alcohol being tipped down the drain. Vast
quantities of bootleg (illegal) liquor were
seized, but were only a fraction of the total.
Corruption
Prohibition led to massive corruption. Many of the law enforcement officers
were themselves involved with the liquor trade. Big breweries stayed in
business throughout the Prohibition era. This is not an easy business to hide!
But the breweries stayed in operation by bribing local government officials,
Prohibition agents and the police to leave them alone.
In some cities, police officers were quite prepared to direct people to
speakeasies. Even when arrests were made, it was difficult to get
convictions because more senior officers or even judges were in the pay of
the criminals. One in twelve Prohibition agents was dismissed for
corruption. The New York FBI boss, Don Chaplin, once ordered his 200
agents: ‘Put your hands on the table, both of them. Every son of a bitch
wearing a diamond is fired.’
SOURCE 28
A visit to a speakeasy.
SOURCE 29
Statistics in the Detroit police court of 1924 show 7391 arrests for
violations of the prohibition law, but only 458 convictions. Ten years
ago a dishonest policeman was a rarity … Now the honest ones
are pointed out as rarities … Their relationship with the bootleggers
is perfectly friendly. They have to pinch two out of five once in a
while, but they choose the ones who are least willing to pay bribes.
E. Mandeville, in Outlook magazine, 1925.
SOURCE 30
‘The National Gesture’: a cartoon from the
Prohibition era.
Source Analysis
1  Explain the message of Source 30.
2  Read Source 29. How has Prohibition affected the police in
Detroit?
3  Which of Sources 29 and 30 do you most trust to give you
accurate information about corruption during the Prohibition era?
Revision Tip
Make sure you can use these key terms correctly in an answer
about why Prohibition failed: bootlegger, speakeasy, demand,
corruption.
Gangsters
The most common image people have of the Prohibition era is the GANGSTER.
Estimates suggest that organised gangs made about $2 bi llion out of the sale
of illegal alcohol. The boot legger George Remus certainly did well from the
trade. He had a huge network of paid officials that allowed him to escape
charge after charge against him. At one party he gave a car to each of the
women guests, while all the men received diamond cuff links worth $25,000.
The rise of the gangsters tells us a lot about American society at this time.
The gangsters generally came from immigrant backgrounds. In the early
1920s  the main gangs were Jewish, Polish, Irish and Italian. Gangsters
generally came from poor er backgrounds within these communities. They
were often poor ly educated, bu t they were also clever and ruthless. Dan
O’Banion (Irish gang leader murdered by Capone), Pete and Vince
Guizenberg (hired killers who worked for Bugsy Moran and died in the St
Valentine’s Day Massacre), and Lucky Luciano (Italian killer who spent ten
years in prison) were some of the most pow erful gangsters. The gangs fought
viciously with each other to control the liquor trade and also the prostitution,
gambling and protection rackets that were centred on the speakeasies. They
made use of new technology, especially automobiles and the Thompson sub-
machine gun, which was devastatingly pow erful but could be carried around
and hidden under an overcoat. In Chicago alone, there were 130 g angland
murders in 1926 a nd 1927 a nd not one arrest. By the late 1920s  fear and
bribery made law enforcement ineffective.
SOURCE 31
A portrait of Al Capone from 1930.
Chicago and Al Capone
The gangsters operated all over the USA, but they were most closely
associated with Chicago. Perhaps the best example of the pow er of the
gangsters is Chicago gangster boss Al Capone. He arrived in Chicago in
1919, on  the run from a murder investigation in New York. He ran a drinking
club for his boss Johnny Torio. In 1925 T orio retired after an assassination
attempt by one of his rivals, Bugsy Moran. Capone took over and proved to
be a formidable gangland bos s. He built up a huge network of corrupt
officials among Chicago’s police, local government workers, judges,
lawyers and Prohibition agents. He even controlled Chicago’s mayor,
William Hale Thompson. Surprisingly, he was a high-profile and even
popu lar figure in the city. He was a regular at baseball and American
football games and was cheered by the crowd when he took his seat. He was
well known for giving generous tips (over $100)  to waiters and shop girls
and spent $30,000 on  a soup kitchen for the unemployed.
Capone was supported by a ruthless gang, handpicked for their loyalty to
him. He killed two of his own men whom he suspected of plotting against
him by beating their brains out with a baseball bat. By 1929 h e had destroyed
the pow er of the other Chicago gangs, committing at least 300 m urders in the
process. The peak of his violent reign came with the St Valentine’s Day
Massacre in 1929. Capone’s men murdered seven of his rival Bugsy Moran’s
gang, using a false police car and two gangsters in police uniform to put
Moran’s men off their guard.
ACTIVITY
In other chapters of this book, you have seen profiles of important
historical figures. Use the information and sources to produce two
different profiles of Al Capone.
•  The first profile is the kind of profile that might appear in this
book.
•  The second profile is one that might have appeared inside a news
magazine of the time in 1930 after the St Valentine’s Day
Massacre.
Make sure you can explain (to your teacher) why the two profiles
are different.
This information about Capone will get you started:
•  Born 1889 in New York.
•  Arrived in Chicago in 1919.
•  Took over from Johnny Torio in 1925.
•  Jailed in 1931 for not paying taxes.
•  Released in January 1939.
•  Died in 1947 from syphilis.
The end of Prohibition
The St Valentine’s Day Massacre was a turning point. The papers screamed
that the gangsters had graduated from murder to massacre. It seemed that
Prohibition, often called ‘the Noble Experiment’, had failed. It had made the
USA lawless, the police corrupt and the gangsters rich and pow erful. When
the Wall Street Crash was followed by the Depression in the early 1930s ,
there were also sound economic arguments for getting rid of it. Legalising
alcohol would create jobs, raise tax revenue and free up resources tied up in
the impossible task of enforcing Prohibition. The Democrat president
Franklin D Roosevelt was elected in 1932 a nd Prohibition was REPEALED in
December 1933.
Revision Tip
Add these to your list of terms you should know how to explain in
relation to Prohibition: gangster, Chicago.
FOCUS TASK 10.8
Why did Prohibition fail?
In the end Prohibition failed. Here are four groups who could be
blamed for the failure of Prohibition.
a)  the American people who carried on going to illegal
speakeasies making Prohibition difficult to enforce
b)  the law enforcers who were corrupt and ignored the law
breakers
c)  the bootleggers who continued supplying and selling alcohol
d)  the gangsters who controlled the trade through violence and
made huge profits
1  For each of the above groups find evidence on pages 320–323
to show that it contributed to the failure of Prohibition.
2  Say which group you think played the most important role in the
failure. Explain your choice.
3  Draw a diagram to show links between the groups.
FOCUS TASK 10.9
Why was Prohibition abolished in 1933?
Many people who were convinced of the case for Prohibition
before 1920 were equally convinced that it should be abolished in
1933.
Write two letters.
•  The first should be from a supporter of Prohibition to his or her
Congressman in 1919 explaining why the Congressman should
vote for Prohibition. In your letter, explain how Prohibition could
help to solve problems in America.
•  The second should be from the same person to the
Congressman in 1933 explaining why the Congressman should
vote against Prohibition. In your letter, explain why Prohibition has
failed.
Key Question Summary
How far did US society change in the 1920s?
1  The ‘Roaring Twenties’ is a name given to this period to get
across the sense of vibrancy, excitement and change.
2  The 1920s saw enormous social and cultural change in the cities
with new attitudes to behaviour, entertainment, dress styles and
morals. This was not shared by many in traditional, conservative
rural communities.
3  There was also a growth in prejudice and intolerance, particularly
towards new immigrants. This was highlighted by the Sacco and
Vanzetti case.
4  The divide between the urban and rural USA was evident in
different attitudes to the role of women in society, views on
morality and religious values (as shown in the Monkey Trial).
5  In 1920 the manufacture and sale of alcohol was prohibited. But
Prohibition was difficult to enforce and had disastrous effects,
leading to the growth of organised crime, lawlessness and
corruption in politics and business.
10C What were the causes and
consequences of the Wall Street
Crash?
FOCUS
In 1928 there was a presidential election. Not surprisingly, with the
booming economy, the Republican Herbert Hoover won. But within a
year he was being cursed by many Americans as the economy
collapsed and a long depression destroyed much of the prosperity
of the 1920s. What went wrong?
Focus Points
•  How far was speculation responsible for the Wall Street Crash?
•  What impact did the Crash have on the economy?
•  What were the social consequences of the Crash?
•  Why did Roosevelt win the election of 1932?
Causes of the Wall Street Crash
To understand the Wall Street Crash you first need to understand how the
stock market is suppos ed to work (see Factfile).
Factfile
Investment and the stock market
•  To set up a company you need money to pay staff, rent
premises, buy equipment, etc.
•  Most companies raise this money from investors. In return, these
investors own a share in the company. They become
‘shareholders’.
•  These shareholders can get a return on their money in two ways:
    –  by receiving a dividend – a share of the profits made by the
company
    –  by selling their shares.
•  If the company is successful, the value of the shares is usually
higher than the price originally paid for them.
•  Investors buy and sell their shares on the stock market. The
American stock market was known as Wall Street.
•  The price of shares varies from day to day. If more people are
buying than selling, then the price goes up. If more are selling
than buying, the price goes down.
•  For much of the 1920s the price of shares on the Wall Street
stock market went steadily upwards.
Speculation
You can see that investment on the stock market would be quite attractive
during an economic boom . The American economy was doing well
throughout the 1920s . Because the economy kept doing well, there were more
share buyers than sellers and the value of shares rose.
It seemed to many Americans that the stock market was an easy and quick
way to get rich. Anyone could buy shares, watch their value rise and then sell
the shares later at a higher price. Many Americans decided to join the stock
market. In 1920 t here had been only 4 million share owners in America. By
1929 t here were 20 m illion, out of a popu lation of 120 m illion (although only
about 1.5 m illion were big investors).
Around 600,000 n ew investors were speculators. SPECULATION is a form of
gambling. Speculators don’t intend to keep their shares for long. They
borrow money to buy some shares, then sell them again as soon as the price
has risen. They pay off their loan and still have a quick profit to show for it.
In the 1920s  speculators didn’t even have to pay the full value of the shares.
They could buy ‘on the margin’, which meant they only had to put dow n 10
per cent of the cash needed to buy shares and could bor row the rest.
Women became heavily involved in speculation. Women speculators owned
over 50 pe r cent of the Pennsylvania Railroad, which became known as the
‘petticoat line’. It was not only individuals who speculated. Banks
themselves got involved in speculation. And certainly they did nothing to
hold it back. American banks lent $9 bi llion for speculating in 1929.
Revision Tip
Speculation sounds simple but it is not easy to explain.
•  Make sure you can describe two examples which show how
speculation worked.
•  Practise explaining why speculation was attractive to Americans.
•  Also practise explaining why it was risky to the US economy.
Through most of the 1920s  the rise in share prices was quite steady. There
were even some dow nturns. But in 1928 s peculation really took hold.
Demand for shares was at an all-time high, and prices were rising at an
unheard-of rate. In March, Union Carbide shares stood a t $145. By
September 1928 t hey had risen to $413.
One vital ingredient in all this was confidence. If people were confident that
prices would keep rising, there would be more buyers than sellers. However,
if they thought prices might stop rising, all of a sudden there would be more
sellers and … c rash, the whole structure would come dow n. This is exactly
what happened in 1929.
SOURCE 1
The stock market hysteria reached its apex that year [1929] …
Everyone was playing the market … On my last day in New York, I
went down to the barber. As he removed the sheet he said softly,
‘Buy Standard Gas. I’ve doubled … It’s good for another double.’ As
I walked upstairs, I reflected that if the hysteria had reached the
barber level, something must soon happen.
Cecil Roberts, The Bright Twenties, 1938.
Weaknesses in the US economy
The construction industry (one of the leading signs of health in any economy)
had actually started its dow nturn as far back as 1926. You have already seen
how farming was in trouble in the 1920s . You have also seen the decline in
coal, textile and other traditional trades. There were other concerns, such as
the unequal distribution of wealth and the precarious state of some banks. In
the decade before the Crash, ove r 500 ba nks had failed each year. These
were mainly small banks that lent too m uch.
By 1929 ot her sectors of the economy were showing signs of strain after the
boom  years of the 1920s . The boom  was based on the increased sale of
consumer goods  such as cars and electrical appliances. There were signs that
American industries were producing more of these goods  than they could
sell. The market for these goods  was largely the rich and the middle classes.
By 1929 t hose who could afford consumer goods  had already bought them.
The majority of Americans who were poor  could not afford to buy them,
even on the generous hire purchase and credit schemes on offer.
FIGURE 2
Selected share prices, 1928–29.
Companies tried high-pressure advertising. In 1929 A merican industry spent
a staggering $3 bi llion on magazine advertising. But with workers’ wages not
rising and prices not falling, demand decreased.
In the past, American industry would have tried to export its surplus goods .
But people in Europe could not afford American goods  either. In addition,
after nine years of American tariffs, Europe had put up its own tariffs to
protect its industries.
The Wall Street Crash, October 1929
By the summer of 1929 t hese weaknesses were beginning to show. Even car
sales were slowing, and in June 1929 t he official figures for industrial output
showed a fall for the first time for four years. Speculators on the American
stock exchange became nervous about the value of their shares and began to
sell.
As you can see from the Factfile, the slide in share values started slowly. But
throughout September and October it gathered pace. Many investors had
borrowed money to buy their shares and could not afford to be stuck with
shares worth less than the value of their loan. Soon other investors sold their
shares and within days panic set in. On Tuesday 29 O ctober 1929 i t became
clear to the speculators that the banks were not going to intervene to support
the price of shares, and so Wall Street had its busiest and its worst day in
history as speculators desperately tried to dump 13 m illion shares at a
fraction of the price they had paid for them.
Factfile
The Wall Street Crash, 1929
•  June Factory output starts declining. Steel production starts
declining.
•  3 Sept The hottest day of the year. The last day of rising prices.
•  5 Sept ‘The Babson Break’: Roger Babson, economic forecaster,
says ‘Sooner or later a crash is coming and it may be terrific.’
The index of share prices drops ten points.
•  6 Sept Market recovers.
•  Mon 21 Oct Busy trading. Much selling. So much trading that the
‘ticker’ which tells people of changes in price falls behind by 1½
hours. Some people don’t know they are ruined until after the
exchange closes. By then it is too late to do anything about it.
•  Thu 24 Oct Busiest trading yet. Big falls. Banks intervene to buy
stock. Confidence returns. Prices stabilise.
•  Mon 28 Oct Massive fall. Index loses 43 points. It is clear that
the banks have stopped supporting share prices.
•  Tue 29 Oct Massive fall. People sell for whatever they can get.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe:
•  two weaknesses in the US economy in the late 1920s
•  two events leading up to the Crash.
FOCUS TASK 10.10
How far was speculation responsible for the Wall Street
Crash?
Work in groups.
1  Here are five factors that led to the Wall Street Crash. For each
one explain how it helped to cause the Crash:
    •  poor distribution of income between rich and poor
    •  over-production by American industries
    •  the actions of speculators
    •  no export market for US goods
    •  decision by the banks not to support share prices.
2  If you think other factors are also important, add them to your
list and explain why they helped to cause the Crash.
3  Decide whether there is one factor that is more important than
any of the others. Explain your choice.
The economic consequences of the
Wall Street Crash
At first, it was not clear what the impact of the Crash would be. In the short
term, the large speculators were ruined. The rich lost most because they had
invested most. For example:
•  The Vanderbilt family lost $40 m illion.
•  Rockefeller lost 80 pe r cent of his wealth – bu t he still had $40 m illion
left.
•  The British politician Winston Churchill lost $500,000.
•  The singer Fanny Brice lost $500,000.
•  Groucho and Harpo M arx (two of the Marx Brothers comedy team) lost
$240,000 e ach.
The rich had always been the main buyers of American goods , so there was
also an immediate dow nturn in spending. Many others had bor rowed money
in order to buy shares that were now worthless. They were unable to pay
back their loans to the banks and insurance companies, so they went
bankrupt. Some banks themselves also went bankrupt if they had lent too
much.
SOURCE 3
An attempt to make some cash after the Wall
Street Crash, 1929.
At first, however, these seemed like tragic but isolated incidents. President
Hoove r reassured the nation that prosperity was ‘just around the corner’. He
cut taxes to encourage people to buy more goods  and by mid-1931
production was rising again slightly and there was hope that the situation was
more settled.
In fact, it was the worst of the Depression that was ‘just around the corner’,
because the Crash had destroyed the one thing that was crucial to the
prosperity of the 1920s : confidence.
Revision Tip
The impact of the Crash is a big theme. There are so many
examples to choose from it is helpful to narrow it down.
•  Choose four examples and make sure you can describe them
thoroughly.
•  Make sure at least one of your examples is about the collapse of
banks and one is about unemployment.
Banking crisis
This was most marked in the banking crisis. In 1929, 659 ba nks failed. As
banks failed people stoppe d trusting them and many withdrew their savings.
In 1930 a nother 1352 w ent bankrupt. The biggest of these was the Bank of the
United States in New York, which went bankrupt in December 1930. It had
400,000 de positors – many of them recent immigrants. Almost one-third of
New Yorkers saved with it. This was the worst failure in American history.
To make matters worse, 1931 s aw escalating problems in European banks,
which had a knock-on effect in the USA. Panic set in. Around the country a
billion dollars was withdrawn from banks and put in safe deposit boxes, or
stored at home. People felt that hard currency was the only security. Another
2294 ba nks went under in 1931.
Downward spiral
So while Hoove r talked opt imistically about the return of prosperity,
Americans were showing their true feelings. They now kept their money
instead of buying new goods  or shares. Of course, this meant that banks had
less money to give out in loans to businesses or to people as mortgages on
homes. To make matters worse banks started to demand businesses repay
loans. Businesses that could not afford to do s o went bankrupt. Others cut
production further, laid off workers or reduced the wages of those who still
worked for them. A dow nward spiral was firmly established. Between 1928
and 1933 bot h industrial and farm production fell by 40 pe r cent, and average
wages by 60 pe r cent.
As workers were laid off or were paid less, they bought less. This reduction
in spending was devastating. The American economy had been geared up for
mass consumption and relied on continued high spending. Fewer goods
bought meant fewer people employed. By 1932 t he USA was in the grip of
the most serious economic depression the world had ever seen. By 1933
there were 14 m illion unemployed, and 5000 ba nks had gone bankrupt.
SOURCE 4
A cartoon by American cartoonist John
McCutcheon, 1932. The man on the bench
has lost all his savings because of a bank
failure.
Source Analysis
Look at Source 4. Do you think the cartoonist is sympathetic or
critical of the man on the bench? Explain your opinion.
The problems in the urban areas soon had an impact on the countryside. Farm
prices were already low before the Crash for the reasons we saw on page
304. Now people in the towns could not afford to buy so much food s o prices
went into freefall. Soon they were so low that the cost of transporting
animals to market was higher than the price of the animals themselves. Total
farm income had slipped to just $5 bi llion.
To complete the mess international trade had collapsed. Other countries were
suffering from the Depression too so bou ght less American goods . To protect
American business the US Government put tariffs on imports so other
countries sold less goods  to America. The USA’s international trade was
drastically reduced from $10 bi llion in 1929 t o $3 bi llion in 1932.
FOCUS TASK 10.11
What impact did the Crash have on the American economy?
You can see how a downward spiral was started by the Crash.
Draw your own copy of this diagram and add explanations and
examples to each heading.
The human cost of the Depression
In the countryside
People in agricultural areas were hardest hit by the Depression, because the
1920s  had not been kind to them anyway. As farm income fell, huge numbers
of farmers were unable to pay their mortgages. Some farmers organised
themselves to resist banks seizing their homes. When sheriffs came to seize
their property, bands of farmers holding pitch forks and hangman’s nooses
persuaded the sheriffs to retreat. Others barricaded highways. Most farmers,
however, had no choice but to pack their belongings into their trucks and live
on the road. They picked up work where they could.
Black farmers and labourers were often worse off than their white
neighbours. They lost their land and their farms first. Hunger stalked the
countryside and children fell ill and died from malnutrition. Yet this was
happening while wheat and fruit were left to rot and animals killed because
farmers could not afford to take them to market.
But worse was to come in the Southern and Midwest states where over-
farming and drought caused the topsoil to turn to dust. This was whipped up
by the wind to create an area known as the dustbowl. The dust covered
everything, as Source 6 shows; it got into every crack and crevice making
life unbearable. Many packed up all their belongings and headed for
California to look for work. The plight of these migrants is one of the
enduring impressions of the Depression.
SOURCE 5
During the last three months I have visited … some 20 states of
this wonderfully rich and beautiful country. A number of Montana
citizens told me of thousands of bushels of wheat left in the fields
uncut on account of its low price that hardly paid for the harvesting.
In Oregon I saw thousands of bushels of apples rotting in the
orchards. At the same time there are millions of children who, on
account of the poverty of their parents, will not eat one apple this
winter.
… I saw men picking for meat scraps in the garbage cans of the
cities of New York and Chicago. One man said that he had killed
3,000 sheep this fall and thrown them down the canyon because it
cost $1.10 to ship a sheep and then he would get less than a dollar
for it.
The farmers are being pauperised [made poor] by the poverty of
industrial populations and the industrial populations are being
pauperised by the poverty of the farmers. Neither has the money to
buy the product of the other; hence we have overproduction and
under-consumption at the same time.
Evidence of Oscar Ameringer to a US
Government committee in 1932.
SOURCE 6
A dustbowl farm. Over-farming, drought and
poor conservation turned farmland into
desert.
SOURCE 7
Last summer, in the hot weather, when the smell was sickening and
the flies were thick, there were a hundred people a day coming to
the dumps … a widow who used to do housework and laundry, but
now had no work at all, fed herself and her fourteen-year-old son
on garbage. Before she picked up the meat she would always take
off her glasses so that she couldn’t see the maggots.
From New Republic magazine, February
1933.
In the towns
In the towns, the story was not much better. Unemployment rose rapidly. For
example, in 1932 i n the steel city of Cleveland, 50 pe r cent of workers were
unemployed and in Toledo 80 pe r cent. Forced to sell their homes or kicked
out because they could not pay the rent, city workers joined the army of
unemployed searching for work of any kind. Thousands were taken in by
relatives but many ended up on the streets. At night the parks were full of the
homeless and unemployed. In every city, workers who had contributed to the
prosperity of the 1920s  now queued for bread and soup dished out by charity
workers. A large number of men (estimated at 2 million in 1932)  travelled
from place to place on railway freight wagons seeking work.
Revision Tip
As with the economic effects of the Crash, the key here is to focus.
Choose three examples of hardship and make sure you can
describe those thoroughly. Make sure you include Hoovervilles.
Thousands of children lived in wagons or tents next to the tracks. Every town
had a so-called HOOVERVILLE. This was a shanty town of ramshackle huts
where the migrants lived while they searched for work. The rubbish tips
were crowded with families hoping to scrape a meal from the leftovers of
more fortunate people. Through 1931, 238 pe ople were admitted to hospital
in New York suffering from malnutrition or starvation, 45 of  whom died.
FIGURE 8
Unemployment in the USA, 1929–33.
SOURCE 9
A Hooverville shanty town on wasteland in
Seattle, Washington.
SOURCE 10
There is not an unemployed man in the country that hasn’t
contributed to the wealth of every millionaire in America. The
working classes didn’t bring this on, it was the big boys … We’ve
got more wheat, more corn, more food, more cotton, more money
in the banks, more everything in the world than any nation that ever
lived ever had, yet we are starving to death. We are the first nation
in the history of the world to go to the poorhouse in an automobile.
Will Rogers, an American writer, 1931.
Rogers had a regular humorous column in an
American magazine which was popular with
ordinary people.
SOURCE 11
A migrant family.
Source Analysis
1  Read Source 10. What do you think Will Rogers means by ‘the
big boys’?
2  Explain how a writer such as Rogers can be useful to a historian
studying the impact of the Depression in the 1930s.
FOCUS TASK 10.12
What were the social consequences of the Crash?
1  You have been asked to prepare an exhibition of photos which
compares the life of Americans during the boom times of the
1920s with the depressed years of the 1930s. Choose two
pictures from the 1920s and two from the 1930s which you think
present the greatest contrast. Explain your choice.
2  Do you think everyone suffered equally from the Depression?
Explain your answer by referring to Sources 5–11. In particular,
think about how the effects of the Depression in the countryside
were different/similar to those in the towns and cities.
The 1932 presidential election
In the 1932 e lection President Hoove r paid the price for the Depression. It
was partly his own fault. Until 1932 h e insisted that ‘prosperity is just around
the corner’. This left him open to bitter criticisms such as Source 13.
Hoover’s failings
Hoove r was regarded as a ‘do-nothing’ president. This was not entirely fair
on Hoove r. He tried to restart the economy in 1930 a nd 1931 w ith tax cuts.
He tried to persuade business leaders not to cut wages. He set up the
Reconstruction Finance Company, which helped banks to stop them going
bankrupt. He did put money into public works programmes, e.g. the Hoove r
Dam on the Colorado R iver. But to most observers these measures did not
match up to the scale of the problems the country was facing. Hoove r and
most Republicans were very reluctant to change their basic policies. They
said that business should be left alone to bring back prosperity. Government
help was not needed. In 1932 H oove r blocked the Garner–Wagner Relief
Bill, which would have allowed Congress to provide $2.1 bi llion to create
jobs.
Think!
From Sources 12 and 13 make a list of criticisms of Hoover and his
Government.
Even more damaging to Hoove r’s personal reputation, however, was how
little he tried to help people who were suffering because of the Depression.
He believed that social security was not the responsibility of government.
Relief should be provided by local government or charities.
SOURCE 12
Never before in this country has a government fallen … so low …
in popular estimation or been [such] an object of cynical contempt.
Never before has [a president] given his name so freely to latrines
and offal dumps, or had his face banished from the [cinema]
screen to avoid the hoots and jeers of children.
Written by a political commentator.
The Bonus Marchers
Hoove r’s reputation was particularly damaged by an event in June 1932.
Thousands of servicemen who had fought in the First World War marched on
Washington asking for their war bonuses (a kind of pension) to be paid early.
The marchers camped peacefully outside the White House and sang patriotic
songs. Hoove r refused to meet them. He appointed General Douglas
MacArthur to handle the situation. MacArthur convinced himself (with little
or no evidence) that they were communist agitators. He ignored Hoove r’s
instructions to treat the marchers with respect. Troops  and pol ice used tear
gas and burned the marchers’ camps.
SOURCE 13
Farmers are just ready to do anything to get even with the situation.
I almost hate to express it, but I honestly believe that if some of
them could buy airplanes they would come down here to
Washington to blow you fellows up … The farmer is a naturally
conservative individual, but you cannot find a conservative farmer
today. Any economic system that has in its power to set me and my
wife in the streets, at my age what can I see but red?
President of the Farmers’ Union of Wisconsin,
A.N. Young, speaking to a Senate committee
in 1932.
SOURCE 14

A 1932 Democrat election poster.
Source Analysis
Source 14 had a very powerful effect on Americans. Explain why.
Roosevelt’s characteristics
There could be no greater contrast to Hoove r than his oppon ent in the 1932
election, the Democrat candidate, Franklin D. Roosevelt. Roosevelt’s main
characteristics as a politician were:
•  He was not a radical, but he believed in ‘active gove rnment’ to improve
the lives of ordinary people.
•  He had plans to spend public money on getting people back to work. As
Governor of New York, he had already started doi ng this in his own state.
•  He was not afraid to ask for advice from experts, such as factory owners,
union leaders and economists.
The campaign
With such ill-feeling towards Hoove r being expressed throughout the country,
Roosevelt was confident of victory, but he took no chances. He went on a
train tour of the USA in the weeks before the election and mercilessly
attacked the attitude of Hoove r and the Republicans.
Roosevelt’s own plans were rather vague and general. But he realised
people wanted action, whatever that action was. In a 20,800- km campaign
trip he made sixteen major speeches and another 60 from the back of his
train. He promised the American people a ‘New Deal’ (see Source 15). It
was not only his policies that attracted support; it was also his personality.
He radiated warmth and inspired confidence. He made personal contact with
the American people and seemed to offer hope and a way out of the terrible
situation they were in.
SOURCE 15
Millions of our citizens cherish the hope that their old standards of
living have not gone forever. Those millions shall not hope in vain
… I pledge myself, to a New Deal for the American people. This is
more than a political campaign; it is a call to arms. Give me your
help, not to win votes alone, but to win this crusade to restore
America … I am waging a war against Destruction, Delay, Deceit
and Despair.
Roosevelt’s pre-election speech, 1932.
The election was a landslide victory for Roosevelt. He won by 7 million
votes and the Democrats won a majority of seats in Congress. It was the
worst defeat the Republicans had ever suffered.
FOCUS TASK 10.13
Why did Roosevelt win the 1932 election?
In many ways Roosevelt’s victory needs no explanation. Indeed, it
would have been very surprising if any president could have been
re-elected after the sufferings of 1929–32. But it is important to
recognise the range of factors that helped Roosevelt and damaged
Hoover.
Write your own account of Roosevelt’s success under the following
headings:
•  The experiences of ordinary people, 1929–32
•  The policies of the Republicans
•  Actions taken by the Republicans
•  Roosevelt’s election campaign and personality.
Revision Tip
Make sure you can describe:
•  two actions taken by Hoover
•  two factors which damaged Hoover
•  two reasons why people supported Roosevelt.
Key Question Summary
What were the causes and consequences of the Wall Street
Crash?
1  In October 1929 the Wall Street stock market crashed with a
devastating impact on America and the rest of the world.
2  The Crash was partly to do with uncontrolled speculation but it
was also the result of underlying weaknesses in the American
economy; in particular, industry was over-producing goods which
it could not sell.
3  The main consequences for the economy were huge losses for
investors, bank failures, factories closing, mass unemployment,
the collapse of farm prices and a drastic reduction in foreign
trade.
4  The human cost was devastating: unemployment, homelessness,
poverty and hunger. Families were split and ‘Hoovervilles’
appeared on the edges of cities.
5  Farmers lost their land and were dispossessed. Poverty was
rampant in rural areas. Matters were made even worse by the
dustbowl, which led to mass migration from central southern
America to California.
6  President Hoover was unable to deal with the crisis. He believed
that government should not interfere too much: the system would
repair itself. The measures he undertook were too little too late
and he did not do enough to provide relief to those who were
suffering.
7  In 1932, Americans elected Franklin D Roosevelt as president.
He promised a New Deal to help people and get America back to
work.
10D How successful was the New
Deal?
The Hundred Days
In the first hundred days of his presidency, Roosevelt worked round the clock
with his advisers (who became known as the ‘Brains Trust’) to produce an
enormous range of sweeping measures.
One of the many problems affecting the USA was its loss of confidence in the
banks. The day after his inauguration Roosevelt ordered all of the banks to
close and to remain closed until government officials had checked them over.
A few days later 5000 t rustworthy banks were allowed to reopen. They were
even supported by government money if necessary. At the same time,
Roosevelt’s advisers had come up with a set of rules and regulations which
would prevent the reckless speculation that had contributed to the Wall Street
Crash.
FOCUS
During his election campaign Roosevelt had promised the American
people a New Deal. He planned to use the full power of the
government to get the USA out of depression. In 10.4 you will
examine how far he succeeded.
Focus Points
•  What was the New Deal as introduced in 1933?
•  How far did the character of the New Deal change after 1933?
•  Why did the New Deal encounter opposition?
•  Why did unemployment persist despite the New Deal?
•  Did the fact that the New Deal did not solve unemployment mean
that it was a failure?
These two measures, the Emergency Banking Act and the Securities
Exchange Commission, gave the American people a taste of what the New
Deal was to look like, but there was a lot more to come. One of Roosevelt’s
advisers at this time said, ‘During the whole Hundred Days Congress, people
didn’t know what was going on, but they knew something was happening,
something good f or them.’ In the HUNDRED DAYS, Roosevelt sent fifteen
propos als to Congress and all fifteen were adopted. Just as importantly, he
took time to explain to the American people what he was doing and why he
was doing it. Every Sunday he would broadcast on radio to the nation. An
estimated 60 m illion Americans tuned in to these ‘fireside chats’.
Nowadays, we are used to pol iticians doing this. At that time it was a new
development.
The Federal Emergency Relief Administration tackled the urgent needs of
the poor . $500 m illion was spent on soup kitchens, blankets, employment
schemes and nursery schools.
The Civilian Conservation Corps (CCC) was aimed at unemployed young
men. They could sign on for periods of six months, which could be renewed
if they could still not find work. Most of the work done by the CCC was on
environmental projects in national parks. The money earned generally went
back to the men’s families. Around 2.5 m illion were helped by this scheme.
SOURCE 1
This is the time to speak the truth frankly and boldly … So let me
assert my firm belief that the only thing we have to fear is fear itself
… This nation calls for action and action now … Our greatest
primary task is to put people to work … We must act and act
quickly.
Roosevelt’s inauguration speech, 4 March
1933.
The Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) tried to take a long-
term view of the problems facing farmers. It set quotas to reduce farm
production in order to force prices gradually upwards. At the same time, the
AAA helped farmers to modernise and to use farming methods that would
conserve and protect the soil. In cases of extreme hardship, farmers could
also receive help with their mortgages. The AAA certainly helped farmers,
although modernisation had the unfortunate effect of putting more farm
labourers out of work.
SOURCE 2
The bank rescue of 1933 was probably the turning point of the
Depression. When people were able to survive the shock of having
all the banks closed, and then see the banks open up again, with
their money protected, there began to be confidence. Good times
were coming. It marked the revival of hope.
Raymond Moley, one of Roosevelt’s advisers
during the Hundred Days Congress session.
The final measure of the Hundred Days passed on 18 J une was the National
Industrial Recovery Act (NIRA). It set up two important organisations:
•  The Public Works Administration (PWA) used government money to
build schools, roads, dams, bridges and airports. These would be vital
once the USA had recovered, and in the short term they created millions of
jobs.
•  The National Recovery Administration (NRA) improved working
conditions in industry and outlawed child labour. It also set out fair wages
and sensible levels of production. The idea was to stimulate the economy
by giving workers money to spend, without over-producing. It was
voluntary, but firms that joined used the blue eagle as a symbol of
presidential approval. Over two million employers joined the scheme.
SOURCE 3
Two 1933 American cartoons.
Source Analysis
Look carefully at the two cartoons – Sources 3A and 3B.
1  Use the text on pages 330–335 to help you to understand all the
details. You could annotate your own copy.
2  Put the message of each cartoon into your own words.
The Tennessee Valley Authority
As you can see from Figure 4, the Tennessee Valley was a huge area that cut
across seven states. The area had great physical problems. In the wet season,
the Tennessee river would flood. In the dry it would reduce to a trickle. The
farming land around the river was a dust bow l. The soil was eroding and
turning the land into desert. The area also had great social problems. Within
the valley people lived in pove rty. The majority of households had no
electricity. The problems of the Tennessee Valley were far too large for one
state to deal with and it was very difficult for states to co-operate.
Roosevelt therefore set up an independent organisation called the TENNESSEE
VALLEY AUTHORITY (TVA), which cut across the pow ers of the local state
governments. The main focus of the TVA’s work was to build a series of
dams on the Tennessee river. They transformed the region. The dams made it
possible to irrigate the dried-out lands. They also provided electricity for
this underdeveloped area. Above  all, building the dams created thousands of
jobs in an area badly hit by the Depression.
FIGURE 4
The Tennessee Valley and the work of the
TVA.
FOCUS TASK 10.14
What was the New Deal, as introduced in 1933?
Through pages 334–335 all the New Deal measures and agencies
are highlighted like this. Use the text to complete your own copy
of this table.
Impact of the Hundred Days
The measures introduced during the Hundred Days had an immediate effect.
They restored confidence in government. Reporters who travelled the country
brought back reports of the new spirit to be seen around the USA. Historians,
too, a gree that Roosevelt’s bold and decisive action did have a marked effect
on the American people.
Factfile
Main events of the Hundred Days
•  4 March Roosevelt inaugurated.
•  5 March Closed banks.
•  9 March Selected banks reopened.
•  12 March Roosevelt’s first radio ‘fireside chat’. Encouraged
Americans to put their money back into the banks. Many did so.
•  31 March The Civilian Conservation Corps set up.
•  12 May The Agricultural Adjustment Act passed.
•  18 May The Tennessee Valley Authority created.
•  18 June The National Industrial Recovery Act passed.
Achievements of the Hundred Days
•  It restored confidence and stopped investors pulling money out of
the banks.
•  Banking measures saved 20 per cent of home owners and
farmers from repossession.
•  Farmers were 50 per cent better off under AAA by 1936.
•  TVA brought electrical power to underdeveloped areas.
•  Public Works Administration created 600,000 jobs and built
landmarks like San Francisco’s Golden Gate Bridge.
SOURCE 5
Wandering around the country with one of New York’s baseball
teams, I find that [what was] the national road to ruin is now a
thriving thoroughfare. It has been redecorated. People have come
out of the shell holes. They are working and playing and seem
content to let a tribe of professional worriers do their worrying for
them.
Rudd Rennie, an American journalist, on the
early days of the New Deal. From Changing
the Tune from Gloom to Cheer, 1934.
SOURCE 6
The CCC, the PWA, and similar government bodies (the alphabet
agencies as Americans called them) made work for millions of
people. The money they earned began to bring back life to the
nation’s trade and businesses. More customers appeared in the
shops … As people started to buy again, shopkeepers, farmers
and manufacturers began to benefit from the money the
government was spending on work for the unemployed. This
process was described by Roosevelt as ‘priming the pump’. By this
he meant that the money the Federal Government was spending
was like a fuel, flowing into the nation’s economic machinery and
starting it moving again.
D.B. O’Callaghan, Roosevelt and the USA,
published in 1966.
SOURCE 7
As Roosevelt described it, the ‘New Deal’ meant that the forgotten
man, the little man, the man nobody knew much about, was going
to be dealt better cards to play with … He understood that the
suffering of the Depression had fallen with terrific impact upon the
people least able to bear it. He knew that the rich had been hit hard
too, but at least they had something left. But the little merchant, the
small householder and home owner, the farmer, the man who
worked for himself – these people were desperate. And Roosevelt
saw them as principal citizens of the United States, numerically
and in their importance to the maintenance of the ideals of
American democracy.
Frances Perkins, The Roosevelt I Knew,
1947. Perkins was Labour Secretary under
Roosevelt from 1933.
Source Analysis
1  What do Sources 5–7 agree about?
2  What do they disagree about?
Revision Tip
•  The various New Deal agencies can be a bit confusing. Make
sure you can describe the aims and the work of at least the
National Industrial Recovery Act and the Tennessee Valley
Authority.
•  There was a lot of activity in the Hundred Days but you need to
focus on effects. Make sure you can give examples of at least
three ways the Hundred Days had an impact on Americans.
The Second New Deal
Despite his achievements, by May 1935 R oosevelt was facing a barrage of
criticism. Roosevelt was unsure what to do. He had hoped to transform the
USA, but it didn’t seem to be working as he had hoped.
SOURCE 8
Migrant Mother (number 6) by Dorothea
Lange, taken in Nipomo, California, March
1936. Many farmers migrated to California
where farming had been less badly hit by the
Depression.
Tuesday, 14 M ay 1935 t urned out to be a key date. Roosevelt met with a
group of senators and close advisers who shared his views and aims. They
persuaded him to take radical steps to achieve his vision and make the USA a
fairer place for all Americans (see Source 7). One month later, he presented
the leaders of Congress with a huge range of laws that he wanted passed.
This became known as the SECOND NEW DEAL and was aimed at areas that
affected ordinary people – for example strengthening unions to fight for the
members’ rights, financial security in old age – as well as continuing to
tackle unemployment. The most significant aspects were:
•  The Wagner Act forced employers to allow TRADE UNIONS in their
companies and to let them negotiate pay and conditions. It made it illegal
to sack workers for being in a union.
•  The Social Security Act provided state pensions for the elderly and for
widows. It also allowed state governments to work with the federal
government to provide help for the sick and the disabled. Most
importantly, the Act set up a scheme for unemployment insurance.
Employers and workers made a small contribution to a special fund each
week. If workers became unemployed, they would receive a small amount
to help them out until they could find work.
•  The Works Progress Administration (WPA), later renamed the Works
Project Administration, brought together all the organisations whose aim
was to create jobs. It also extended this work beyond building projects to
create jobs for office workers and even unemployed actors, artists and
photographers. The photograph in Source 8 was taken by a photographer
working for a New Deal agency.
•  The Resettlement Administration (RA) helped smallholders and tenant
farmers who had not been helped by the AAA. This organisation moved
over 500,000 f amilies to better-quality land and housing. The Farm
Security Administration (FSA) replaced the RA in 1937. It gave special
loans to small farmers to help them buy their land. It also built camps to
provide decent living conditions and work for migrant workers.
SOURCE 9
Steel Industry by Howard Cook, painted for
the steel-making town of Pittsburgh,
Pennsylvania.
Source Analysis
1  What impression of the New Deal does Source 9 attempt to
convey?
2  Why do you think Roosevelt wanted artists and photographers to
be employed under the New Deal?
FOCUS TASK 10.15
How far did the character of the New Deal change after 1933?
Draw up two spider diagrams to compare the objectives and
measures of the New Deal and the Second New Deal. Then explain
how the measures of the Second New Deal were different from
those in 1933.
Revision Tip
For the Second New Deal the key measures are the Wagner Act
and the Social Security Act. Make sure you can describe them.
Opposition to the New Deal
A programme such as Roosevelt’s New Deal was unheard of in American
history. It was bound to attract oppos ition and it did.
Not enough!
A number of high-profile figures raised the complaint that the New
Deal was not doing enough to help the poor. Despite the New Deal
measures, many Americans remained desperately poor. The
hardest hit were African Americans and the poor in farming areas.
A key figure was Huey Long. He became Governor of Louisiana in
1928 and a senator in 1932. His methods of gaining power were
unusual and sometimes illegal (they included intimidation and
bribery). However, once he had power he used it to help the poor.
He taxed big corporations and businesses in Louisiana and used the
money to build roads, schools and hospitals. He employed African
Americans on the same terms as whites and clashed with the Ku
Klux Klan.
He supported the New Deal at first, but by 1934 he was criticising it
for being too complicated and not doing enough. He put forward a
scheme called Share Our Wealth. All personal fortunes would be
reduced to $3 million maximum, and maximum income would be $1
million a year. Government taxes would be shared between all
Americans. He also proposed pensions for everyone over 60, and
free washing machines and radios. Long was an aggressive and
forceful character with many friends and many enemies. Roosevelt
regarded him as one of the two most dangerous men in the USA.
Long was assassinated in 1935.
Dr Francis Townsend founded a number of Townsend Clubs to
campaign for a pension of $200 per month for people over 60,
providing that they spent it that month, which would stimulate the
economy in the process. A Catholic priest, Father Coughlin, used
his own radio programme to attack Roosevelt. He set up the
National Union for Social Justice and it had a large membership.
Too much!
The New Deal soon came under fire from sections of the business
community and from Republicans for doing too much. There was a
long list of criticisms:
•  The New Deal was complicated and there were too many codes
and regulations.
•  Government should not support trade unions and it should not
support calls for higher wages – the market should deal with
these issues.
•  Schemes such as the TVA created unfair competition with private
companies.
•  The New Deal schemes were like the economic plans being
carried out in the communist USSR and unsuitable for the
democratic, free-market USA.
•  Roosevelt was behaving like a DICTATOR.
•  High taxes discouraged people from working hard and gave
money to people for doing nothing or doing unnecessary jobs
(see Source 10).
SOURCE 10
The New Deal is nothing more or less than an effort to take away
from the thrifty what the thrifty and their ancestors have
accumulated, or may accumulate, and give it to others who have
not earned it and never will earn it, and thus to destroy the
incentive for future accumulation. Such a purpose is in defiance of
all the ideas upon which our civilisation has been founded.
A Republican opponent of the New Deal
speaking in 1935.
SOURCE 11
A cartoon published in an American
newspaper in the mid-1930s.
Think!
Look at the criticisms of the New Deal. Roosevelt’s opponents
were often accused of being selfish. How far do the criticisms
support or contradict that view?
Roosevelt fights back
Roosevelt was upset by the criticisms, but also by the tactics used against
him by big business and the Republicans. They used a smear campaign
against him and all connected to him. They said that he was disabled because
of a sexually transmitted disease rather than polio. Employers put messages
into their workers’ pay packets saying that New Deal Schemes would never
happen. Roosevelt turned on these enemies bitterly (see Source 12). And it
seemed the American people were with him. In the 1936 e lection, he won 27
million votes – with the highest margin of victory ever achieved by a US
president. He was then able to joke triumphantly, ‘Everyone is against the
New Deal except the voters.’
Profile
Franklin D. Roosevelt (FDR)
•  Born 1882 into a rich New York family.
•  Went to university and became a successful lawyer.
•  Entered politics in 1910 as a Democratic senator for New York.
•  Paralysed by polio in 1921 and spent the rest of his life in a
wheelchair.
•  Became president in 1933, in the middle of the economic crisis.
•  Roosevelt was an excellent public speaker, an optimist and a
believer in the ‘American Dream’ – that anyone who worked hard
enough could become rich.
•  His ‘New Deal’ policies made him extremely popular.
•  Elected president four times.
•  Led the USA through the Second World War until his death in
April 1945.
•  Often referred to simply as FDR.
SOURCE 12
For twelve years this nation was afflicted with hear-nothing, see-
nothing, do-nothing government. The nation looked to government
but government looked away. Nine crazy years at the stock market
and three long years in the bread-lines! Nine mad years of mirage
and three long years of despair! Powerful influences strive today to
restore that kind of government with its doctrine that government is
best which is most indifferent … We know now that government by
organised money is just as dangerous as government by organised
mob. Never before in all our history have these forces been so
united against one candidate – me – as they stand today. They are
unanimous in their hate of me – and I welcome their hatred.
A speech by Roosevelt in the 1936
presidential election campaign.
SOURCE 13
A 1930s cartoon attacking critics of the New
Deal.
Source Analysis
Study Sources 10–13.
1  How would the author of Source 10 react to Source 11?
2  How would he react to Sources 12 and 13? Make sure you can
explain your answer.
Opposition from the Supreme Court
Roosevelt’s problems were not over with the 1936 e lection. In fact, he now
faced the most pow erful oppon ent of the New Deal – the American Supreme
Court. This Court was dom inated by Republicans who were oppos ed to the
New Deal. It could ove rturn laws if those laws were against the terms of the
Constitution. In May 1935 a  strange case had come before the US Supreme
Court. The Schechter Poultry Corporation had been found guilty of breaking
NRA regulations because it had: sold diseased chickens for human
consumption; filed false sales claims (to make the company worth more);
exploited workers; and threatened government inspectors. It appealed to the
Supreme Court. The Court ruled that the Government had no right to
prosecute the company. This was because the NRA was unconstitutional. It
undermined too m uch of the pow er of the local states.
SOURCE 14
A Punch cartoon, June 1935.
Roosevelt was angry that this group of old Republicans should deny
DEMOCRACY by throwing out laws that he had been elected to pass. He asked
Congress to give him the pow er to appoint six more Supreme Court judges
who were more sympathetic to the New Deal. But Roosevelt misjudged the
mood of  the American public. They were alarmed at what they saw as
Roosevelt attacking the American system of government. Roosevelt had to
back dow n and his plan was rejected. Even so, his actions were not
completely pointless. The Supreme Court had been shaken by Roosevelt’s
actions and was less obstructive in the future. Most of the main measures in
Roosevelt’s Second New Deal were approved by the Court from 1937
onwards.
SOURCE 15
A cartoon from the Brooklyn Daily Eagle,
February 1937.
Source Analysis
Look at Sources 14 and 15. One supports Roosevelt’s actions and
the other one doesn’t. Explain which is which, and how you made
your decision.
FOCUS TASK 10.16
Why did the New Deal encounter opposition?
The thought bubbles below show some of the reasons why people
opposed the New Deal. Use the text and sources on pages 338–
340 to find examples of individuals who held each belief. Try to find
two more reasons why people opposed the New Deal.
The end of the New Deal
The events of 1936 t ook their toll on Roosevelt and he became more cautious
after that. Early in 1937 pr osperity seemed to be returning and Roosevelt did
what all conservatives had wanted: he cut the New Deal BUDGET. He laid off
many workers who had been employed by the New Deal’s own organisations
and the cut in spending triggered other cuts throughout the economy. This
meant that unemployment spiralled upwards once more.
FIGURE 16
Unemployment, and the performance of the
US economy during the 1930s.
The 1937 r ecession damaged Roosevelt badly. Middle-class voters lost
some confidence in him. As a result, in 1938 t he Republicans once again did
well in the congressional elections. Now it was much harder for Roosevelt
to push his reforms through Congress. However, he was still enormously
popu lar with most ordinary Americans (he was elected again with a big
majority in 1940) . The problem was that the USA was no longer as united
behind his New Deal as it had been in 1933. Indeed, by  1940 R oosevelt and
most Americans were focusing more on the outbreak of war in Europe and on
Japan’s exploits in the Far East.
SOURCE 17
A 1937 cartoon from the Portland Press
Herald showing Harold Ickes in conflict with
big business.
Source Analysis
Do you think Source 17 is praising or criticising Ickes? Explain your
answer.
Impact of the New Deal
FOCUS TASK 10.17
What was the impact of the New Deal?
pages 342–343 summarise the impact of the New Deal on various
aspects of 1930s America.
1  For each of the six aspects, decide where you would place this
aspect of the New Deal on the scale. Explain your score and
support it with evidence from Chapter 10D.
Negative impact is –5. Positive impact is +5.
2  Compare your six ‘marks’ on the scale with those of someone
else in your class.
3  Working together, try to come up with an agreed mark for the
impact of the whole New Deal. You will have to think about the
relative importance of different issues. For example, you might
give more weight to a low mark in an important area than to a
high mark in a less important area.
Impact on… confidence in government
•  The New Deal restored the faith of the American people in their
Government.
•  The New Deal was a huge social and economic programme.
Government help on this scale would never have been possible
before Roosevelt’s time. It set the tone for future policies for
government to help people.
•  The New Deal handled billions of dollars of public money, but
there were no corruption scandals. For example, the head of the
Civil Works Administration, Harold Hopkins, distributed $10 billion
in schemes and programmes, but never earned more than his
salary of $15,000. The Secretary of the Interior, Harold Ickes,
actually tapped the phones of his own employees to ensure there
was no corruption. He also employed African Americans,
campaigned against ANTI-SEMITISM and supported the cause of
native Americans.
•  The New Deal divided the USA. Roosevelt and his officials were
often accused of being communists and of undermining American
values. Ickes and Hopkins were both accused of being
antibusiness because they supported trade unions.
•  The New Deal undermined local government.
Impact on… industrial workers
•  The NRA and Second New Deal strengthened the position of
labour unions.
•  Roosevelt’s Government generally tried to support unions and
make large corporations negotiate with them.
•  Some unions combined as the Committee for Industrial
Organisation (CIO) in 1935 – large enough to bargain with big
corporations.
•  The Union of Automobile Workers (UAW) was recognised by the
two most anti-union corporations: General Motors (after a major
sit-in strike in 1936) and Ford (after a ballot in 1941).
•  Big business remained immensely powerful in the USA despite
being challenged by the Government.
•  Unions were still treated with suspicion by employers.
•  Many strikes were broken up with brutal violence in the 1930s.
•  Companies such as Ford, Republic Steel and Chrysler employed
their own thugs or controlled local police forces.
•  By the end of the 1930s there were over 7 million union members
and unions became powerful after the war.
Impact on… unemployment and the economy
•  The New Deal created millions of jobs.
•  It stabilised the American banking system.
•  It cut the number of business failures.
•  Projects such as the TVA brought work and an improved standard of
living to deprived parts of the USA.
•  New Deal projects provided the USA with valuable resources such as
schools, roads and pow er stations.
•  The New Deal never solved the underlying economic problems.
•  The US economy took longer to recover than that of most European
countries.
•  Confidence remained low – throughout the 1930s  Americans only spent
and invested about 75 pe r cent of what they had before 1929.
•  When Roosevelt cut the New Deal budget in 1937, t he country went
back into recession.
•  There were 6 million unemployed in 1941.
•  Only the USA’s entry into the war brought an end to unemployment.
Impact on… African Americans
•  Around 200,000 African Americans gained benefits from the
Civilian Conservation Corps, other New Deal agencies, and relief
programmes.
•  Many African Americans benefited from New Deal slum clearance
and housing projects.
•  Some New Deal agencies discriminated against African
Americans. There was racial segregation in the CCC. Mortgages
were not given to black families in white neighbourhoods.
•  More black workers were unemployed (35 per cent living on relief
in 1935) but they were much less likely to be given jobs and the
ones they did get were often menial.
•  Domestic workers (the area in which many black women were
employed) were not included in the Social Security Act.
•  Roosevelt failed to put through any civil rights legislation,
particularly laws against the lynching of African Americans. He
feared that Democrat senators in the Southern states would not
support him.
SOURCE 18
African Americans queuing for government
relief in 1937 in front of a famous
government poster.
Impact on… women
•  The New Deal saw some women achieve prominent positions.
Eleanor Roosevelt became an important campaigner on social
issues.
•  Mary Macleod Bethune, an African American woman, headed the
National Youth Administration.
•  Frances Perkins was the Secretary of Labor. She removed 59
corrupt officials from the Labor Department and was a key figure
in making the Second New Deal work in practice.
•  Most of the New Deal programmes were aimed to help male
manual workers rather than women (only about 8000 women
were involved in the CCC).
•  Local governments tried to avoid paying out social security
payments to women by introducing special qualifications and
conditions.
•  Frances Perkins was viciously attacked in the press as a Jew
and a Soviet spy. Even her cabinet colleagues tended to ignore
her at social gatherings.
Impact on… Native Americans
•  The Indian Reorganisation Act 1934 provided money to help
native Americans to buy and improve land and control their own
tribal areas.
•  The Indian Reservation Act 1934 helped native Americans to
preserve and practise their traditions, laws and culture and
develop their land as they chose.
•  Native Americans remained a poor and excluded section of
society.
Revision Tip
There is a lot happening on this spread! When it comes to revision,
choose two points from each panel, one positive and one negative,
and try to remember those.
Verdicts on the New Deal
So was the New Deal a success? One of the reasons why this question is
hard to answer is that you need to decide what Roosevelt was trying to
achieve. We know that by 1940, u nemployment was still high and the
economy was certainly not boom ing. On the other hand, economic recovery
was not Roosevelt’s only aim. In fact it may not have been his main aim.
Roosevelt and many of his advisers wanted to reform the USA’s economy
and society. So when you decide whether the New Deal was a success or
not, you will have to decide what you think the aims of the New Deal were,
as well as whether you think the aims were achieved.
SOURCE 19
Many of Roosevelt’s experiments were failures, but that is what
experimentation entails. He would be satisfied he said if 75 per
cent of them produced beneficial results. Experimentation
depended on one of his distinctive characteristics: receptivity to
new and untried methods and ideas.
Written by historian Samuel Rosemann.
FOCUS TASK 10.18
How successful was the New Deal?
This is a complicated question. You have already spent time
thinking about it; now you are going to prepare to write an essay.
1  First recap some key points by answering these questions.
A Roosevelt’s aims
What were Roosevelt’s aims for the First New Deal? (see
page 334)
What new aims did the Second New Deal have? (see page
337)
Which of these aims did Roosevelt succeed in?
How far do you agree with Source 19 about Roosevelt’s
successes and failures?
B Unemployment and the economy
Why did unemployment remain high throughout the 1930s?
(see page 341)
Does this mean that Roosevelt’s New Deal was not a
success?
C Opposition
Why did some people oppose Roosevelt? (see page 338)
How far do you think opposition to the New Deal made it hard
for the New Deal to work?
D Criticisms and achievements
Which criticism of the New Deal do you think is most serious?
Why?
Which achievement do you think is the most important? Why?
Would Roosevelt have agreed with your choice? Why?
2  Now write your own balanced account of the successes and
failures of the New Deal, reaching your own conclusion as to
whether it was a success or not. Consider:
    •  the nature and scale of the problem facing Roosevelt
    •  the action he took through the 1930s
    •  the impact of the New Deal on Americans
    •  the reasons for opposition to the New Deal
    •  your own judgement on its success.
Include evidence to back up your judgements.
Keywords
Make sure you know these terms, people or events and are able to
use them or describe them confidently.
•  Boom
•  Capitalism
•  Communism
•  Competition
•  Credit
•  Democrat
•  Depression
•  Flapper
•  Gangster
•  Hire purchase
•  Hollywood
•  Hooverville
•  Hundred Days
•  Immigration
•  Isolationism
•  Jazz
•  Ku Klux Klan
•  Laissez-faire
•  Lynch
•  Mail order
•  Mass consumption
•  Mass production
•  Monkey Trial
•  NAACP
•  New Deal
•  Normalcy
•  Over-production
•  Production line
•  Prohibition
•  Radical
•  Red Scare
•  Republican
•  Reservation (native American)
•  Roaring Twenties
•  Second New Deal
•  Shares
•  Speculation
•  Stock market
•  Supreme Court
•  Tariff
•  Temperance
•  Tennessee Valley Authority
•  Traditional industries
•  Trusts
•  Wall Street Crash
Key Question Summary
How successful was the New Deal?
  1  Roosevelt’s New Deal promised action to get industry and
agriculture working, get Americans back to work and provide
relief for those suffering from the Depression.
  2  The first Hundred Days was a whirlwind of activity, putting into
place a number of New Deal agencies to achieve his aims.
These involved huge public works programmes, schemes to
boost employment and measures to put agriculture and industry
on a more sustainable basis. Millions of dollars were set aside
for relief.
  3  Roosevelt restored confidence in the banks and put financial
bodies in America on a more stable footing.
  4  He explained his actions to Americans and gave hope and
optimism through his radio talks, ‘fireside chats’, to the nation.
  5  The Tennessee Valley Authority was a special example of
government planning across several states.
  6  In 1935 Roosevelt introduced a Second New Deal, which was
focused more on reform and creating a better life for ordinary
Americans.
  7  There was a lot of opposition to his policies from those who
thought he was not doing enough to help and those who thought
he was doing too much. Many thought that the New Deal was a
huge waste of money and resources and was wrong in principle
– it involved too much government interference and undermined
American individualism and self-reliance.
  8  The Supreme Court ruled some parts of the New Deal to be
unconstitutional.
  9  The American people re-elected Roosevelt in 1936 in a
landslide victory.
10  The New Deal did not solve the underlying problems of the
American economy or conquer unemployment. It was the
Second World War that got it going again. Some groups in
society did not do as well out of it as they might have hoped.
11  It did save the banking system, create millions of jobs and
relieve the suffering of millions of Americans. It left much of
lasting value, for example in roads, public buildings and schools.
It set the tone for future government action in the USA.
EXAM-STYLE QUESTIONS
Paper 1-type questions
1  (a)  What was the Tennessee Valley Authority? [4]
    (b)  Explain why Roosevelt introduced the Second New Deal in
1935. [6]
    (c)  ‘The New Deal was a failure.’ How far do you agree with this
statement? Explain your answer. [10]
Paper 4-type questions
2  How important were the US government’s economic policies in
the US economic boom of the 1920s?
3  How significant was the Second New Deal as part of Roosevelt’s
reforms, 1933–41?
See pages 172–190 and pages 346–357 for advice on the different
types of questions you might face.
Exam Focus: Paper 1 Depth Study
questions
The Depth Study you have studied in Chapters 8, 9 or 10 will be
examined in the second part (Section B) of Paper 1.
Note: If you are not doing Coursework then you will be doing Paper
4 (Alternative to Coursework) instead which will also be based on
your Depth Study. This Exam Focus deals with Paper 1 Depth
Study questions. Paper 4 Depth Study questions are dealt with on
pages 351–357.
Structured essay questions
Depth Study and Core Content structured essay questions rely upon the same
skills, so make sure you read all of the advice again on pages 172–179.
Think before you write
It is a common mistake to launch straight into writing as soon as your teacher
gives you questions or assessments begin, but our advice is that you spend
some time thinking before you do s o.
1 Choose your questions carefully
•  When answering exam-style questions or using practice papers, make sure
you choose the correct Depth Study, of course – the one you have actually
studied!
•  Whenever you have a choice of questions make sure you have read all of
them before you decide which to answer. You should have revised enough
to mean you could do a ny of the questions but don’t simply opt for your
favourite topic. Possibly your less favoured topic might have a question
that suits you better.
2 Read the questions carefully
This might sound obvi ous but there is a skill to it.
•  Look for the command words such as ‘describe’ and ‘explain’, which let
you know what type of skills you have to use.
•  Identify the topic and the sub-topic. Questions will often focus on an
event, individual or historical issue.
•  Look for dates. If dates are given they will be important – this is History
after all!
3 Plan your answer
If you think through your answer first, then writing it is easy. If you skip the
thinking and just start writing the risks are:
•  Your writing will be muddled.
•  You will write in an illogical order.
•  Your points won’t lead to your conclusion.
•  Even more likely, you will keep thinking of something more to say and will
run out of time.
4 Plan your time
Managing your time while studying the History syllabus is really important. It
is important that you practise your timings in lessons, assessments and at
home when answering exam-style questions.
•  Make sure you know how long an assessment or a set of exam-style
questions should take. You can use the Specimen Exam Papers from the
Cambridge International website to help you with this.
•  The marks for each sub-question guide you as to how long to spend as
well.
5 Avoid the most common mistakes
•  The structured essay questions contain a different number of marks for each
part, so make sure you don’t spend too m uch time on questions with lower
marks. Poor time management could mean you don’t end up answering all
of the questions!
•  Make sure you are applying the correct skills for the relevant question. If it
is asking you to describe, then don’t explain. If the question is asking you
to make a judgement, make sure you use your own knowledge to support
the judgement. Remember, the skill of making a judgement means you need
to compare and contrast different factors to reach your conclusion, so make
sure you always examine a variety of factors to give a more balanced
response.
•  Questions that ask you to explain are not just asking you to make lists or
give an account of an event. Use connectives and phrases like ‘because’,
‘this meant that’ and ‘therefore’ to develop your answer fully.
pages 347–350 give you example answers with comments to show how to
approach these kinds of questions. Read them all through – not just your
Depth Study topic – so you can see the different types of question and
possible approaches in an answer.
Worked example based on Russia
Depth Study
None of the answers on pages 347–350 are real student
answers. We have written them to help show the features of a
good answer.
(a)  Describe the problems facing the Provisional Government after
March 1917. [4]
The war effort was failing and some soldiers were deserting. The
peasants were demanding land and some were starting to take it.
The Bolsheviks had also started rioting after Lenin returned from
exile. Workers in the cities were starving.
This is a very succinct response which is accurate and to
the point. It contains a well-developed account of the
problems facing the Provisional Government.
(b)  Explain how Lenin secured the Bolsheviks’ hold on power after
the November Revolution of 1917. [6]
Lenin banned non-Bolshevik papers and set up the ‘Cheka’ secret
police. The banks were placed under Bolshevik control.
These are all precise things that Lenin did, but haven’t been
explained to show how they were helping the Bolsheviks
hold on to their power.
Lenin had promised free elections and these were held in late
1917. However, under the first democratic elections to the new
Constituent Assembly, the Socialist Revolutionaries beat the
Bolsheviks. This could have been the end of the Bolsheviks’
power. However, Lenin simply sent the Red Guards to close down
the assembly and to put down the protests against him.
This is better because it is a much fuller explanation of how
Lenin’s actions were leading to the Bolsheviks’ retention of
power.
Finally, Lenin had to negotiate a peace treaty to end the war
because he had promised the people ‘bread, peace and land’. He
hoped that this would increase the popularity of the Bolsheviks and
they would stay in power.
Another sound explanation, showing how Lenin was
attempting to secure power through popularity with the
people.
(c)  ‘The main reason that the Reds won the Civil War was
because the Whites were not unified.’ How far do you agree
with this statement? Explain your answer. [10]
The success of the Reds was definitely helped by the lack of unity
in their opposition. The Whites were made up of lots of different
elements such as the Czech Legion, moderate socialists and ex-
tsarists. This meant they had different leaders and different
objectives and therefore were not able to work together effectively.
This allowed Trotsky to defeat them one by one.
This is a full explanation of how the disunity of the Whites
led to Red success.
However, other things helped the Reds win the Civil War as well.
For example, Lenin introduced War Communism. This system
allowed Reds total control over people’s lives and possessions in
order to win the war. Ruthless discipline was introduced into the
factories. Food was taken from peasant farmers by force in order
to feed the Red Army and the workers in the cities. Strict rationing
was introduced and the Cheka was used to terrify opponents. This
policy ensured the Red Army was kept supplied and could
continue to fight.
This paragraph goes on to examine an alternative factor
which is going to help develop a much more balanced
response. It explains how War Communism was also a factor
in the Reds’ victory.
I think that overall the Reds won because the Whites were not
unified, which helped the Reds pick them off, and also because of
War Communism, which allowed the Red Army to keep fighting.
The answer attempts a conclusion, but this is more of a
summary than a judgement. What you need to do here is to
actively compare the factors, or to draw them together to
show how they are linked. For example, you might say that
‘although it was always going to be difficult for the Whites to
win because they were such a broad alliance, it was the
ruthless and harsh policy of War Communism, which
determined their defeat by 1920 and meant that the
Bolsheviks held onto their power so firmly.’
Worked example based on Germany
Depth Study
(a)  What methods did the Nazis use to control the population? [4]
The SS under Himmler were used to intimidate and terrorise
people into obedience. There was also the Gestapo who were the
secret police. They tapped telephones and spied on people.
Political opponents were taken to concentration camps.
Propaganda was also used to prevent opposition. This was the job
of Goebbels who controlled what people read and heard.
Newspapers were taken over or their content strictly controlled.
Cheap radio sets were sold so people could hear Hitler’s
speeches.
There is nothing wrong with this response but for some
students it might take too much time to write – remember to
be aware of your timings for description-based questions.
There is plenty of accurate knowledge in this answer to give
a full account of Nazi methods of control.
(b)  Explain why some people opposed Nazi rule. [6]
The Communists opposed Nazi rule because of their political
beliefs.
This part of the answer correctly identifies a group who
opposed the Nazis, but it is quite vague. To develop the
answer, remember to add relevant examples.
Some youth groups such as the Edelweiss Pirates were anti-Nazi.
They liked to listen to music and many gangs went looking for the
Hitler Youth to beat them up. They sang songs but changed the
lyrics to mock Germany.
The second part of this answer is only describing the youth
opposition, rather than saying why people opposed the
Nazis. To develop the answer you would need to explain how
the popularity of youth groups fell as the war progressed
because the activities were more focused on military drill
and the war effort.
(c)  ‘The success of Nazi economic policy was more important than
the police state in controlling opposition to the Nazis.’ How far
do you agree with this statement? Explain your answer. [10]
The Nazis’ economic policies did help. They promised
employment and did this through the development of public works
such as building autobahns. Schemes like ‘Strength Through Joy’
gave workers cheap theatre and cinema tickets. So some workers
were won over by economic improvements and popular policies
and this stopped opposition arising in the first place.
This answer starts well by addressing the question. It states
clearly why economic policy helped to control opposition.
This is the clinching bit that makes all the above supporting
detail into an excellent explanation.
From 1935 conscription was applied and rearmament meant
thousands of jobs in armament factories. So some people were
scared of losing their jobs if they spoke out. Germany had been hit
hard by the Depression and many were terrified of being out of
work again.
This paragraph goes further by offering more evidence of
economic policy stifling opposition.
However, the police state was also important. The Nazis were very
successful at getting rid of opposition. The SS went round
terrorising people into obedience. It could arrest people without
trial and put them into concentration camps where people were
tortured or indoctrinated. The Gestapo spied on people. It had
informers and encouraged people to inform on their neighbours
and children on their families. It also tapped phones. The
Germans thought the Gestapo was much more powerful than it
actually was, so lots of people informed on each other purely
because they thought the Gestapo would find out anyway.
There are two factors mentioned in the question. This
paragraph shows the student has developed a more
balanced answer by also examining the second factor as
well.
In conclusion, I would say that economic successes were vital in
controlling opposition amongst ordinary citizens but that the police
state was also vital for dealing with the opposition when it did
arise; the two actually worked together. The Nazis’ main political
opponents had been dealt with swiftly with the help of the SS and
Gestapo, which left smaller pockets of opposition. Ordinary people
with weaker political motivation were more easily won over by the
Nazis’ successes and the fear of losing their jobs.
This is a very good example of reaching a judgement that
links the two factors together. The answer distinguishes
between two types of opposition and shows how a different
method was more successful for each.
Worked example based on USA Depth
Study
(a)  What problems were faced by farmers in the USA in the
1920s? [4]
Many farmers did not share in the prosperity that other groups
experienced in the boom. Farmers had been over-producing since
the end of the First World War and after the European markets
had recovered from the war, they could not sell the extra produce.
Due to this, prices for farming produce fell rapidly in the 1920s.
This was made worse due to high tariffs imposed by overseas
nations and the competition from other countries like Canada who
were able to sell their wheat at a cheaper price than the USA.
This is a really strong response which shows a strong
factual knowledge of the problems faced by farmers.
However, this answer might be too long for some students to
write, so be aware of time management for description-
based questions.
(b)  Explain why Prohibition was introduced in the USA. [6]
Prohibition was introduced in 1920 due to the passing of the
Volstead Act in 1919 which banned the sale and manufacture of
alcohol in the USA.
The first paragraph doesn’t answer the question why
Prohibition was introduced but how it was introduced – you
must be very careful here and read the question properly.
There was a strong temperance movement in the USA in the
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries such as the Anti-Saloon
League and the Women’s Christian Temperance Movement. These
devout Christians wanted to stop the damage that alcohol did to
family life such as causing poverty and violence. This led to a lot
of support for Prohibition, especially in the Southern states of the
USA.
This part of the answer is focused on the question and is a
very convincing explanation of how temperance movements
helped the introduction of Prohibition. It is well-supported by
valid evidence.
Also, some industrialists and doctors supported the idea of
Prohibition. Politicians also backed it as it helped them win votes
from many Christians.
The last part of the answer describes some other valid
reasons for the introduction of Prohibition, but it would be
better if it had been developed into an explanation to give a
fuller response.
These are all reasons why Prohibition was introduced.
(c)  ‘The most successful aspect of the New Deal was the help it
gave to farmers.’ How far do you agree with this statement?
Explain your answer. [10]
The New Deal was a massive help to farmers in the 1930s.
Farmers had been suffering since the 1920s and Roosevelt
introduced the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) to
help solve some of the problems that they faced.
The first paragraph is clearly focused on the question here
and introduces one of the key alphabet agencies that dealt
with problems faced by the agricultural sector.
AAA set quotas on farm production. This would help push food
prices up as in the 1920s prices had been dropping rapidly due to
over-production and the impact of tariffs. The AAA also helped
farmers modernise their production methods which successfully
increased efficiency on farms and protected the quality of the soil.
This was a successful aspect of the New Deal.
Here the point made in the first paragraph is developed into
an explanation and is supported by some strong evidence
about its success.
However, other aspects of the New Deal were also successful
such as dealing with the problem of the unemployed during the
Depression of the 1930s.
The answer has now been developed to give it balance by
examining another aspect of the New Deal – in this case,
dealing with the unemployed.
The Civilian Conservation Corps targeted young, unemployed men
for six months at a time, often providing low-paid work in national
parks and forests. The Public Works Administration created jobs
by using government money to build schools, bridges and roads.
Later, the Works Progress Administration united all of the job
creation agencies of the New Deal to provide work for office
workers, actors and artists. Due to these agencies, unemployment
was reduced from 25 per cent in 1933 to 14 per cent in 1937
proving it was successful.
There is a wide variety of good examples of how the New
Deal dealt with the unemployed – the CCC, PWA and WPA. A
strong explanation of the New Deal’s success is provided
here by using statistical data on unemployment to support
the argument.
Also, the New Deal dealt with the banking crisis with the
Emergency Banking Act. This closed down all banks and only
allowed trustworthy ones to reopen – 5000 in total. This
successfully helped people regain confidence in the banking
system after the Crash in 1929.
Another valid aspect of the New Deal is explained here,
banking. It lacks the depth of the last paragraph, but is a
valid explanation.
Overall, I think that the most successful aspect of the New Deal
was how it helped the unemployed.
The conclusion is only a simple statement containing an
unsupported judgement. This could have been improved by
comparing this aspect of the New Deal against the success
of the others discussed in this answer.
Exam Focus: Paper 4 Depth
Study: Writing extended answers
Your teacher will decide whether you are going to do Coursework
(Component 3) or Paper 4 (Alternative to Coursework). Paper 4 is
a written exam paper. Although the main focus for both Paper 4
and the Coursework is importance/significance, the approach
towards answering the questions is very different and the advice
that follows is NOT applicable in any way to the Coursework.
O-Level students do not take Coursework or Paper 4.
Structure
Paper 4 is a one-hour examination focusing on your chosen Depth Study.
Make sure you use the Specimen Papers on the Cambridge International
website to familiarise yourself with the format of the exam paper so you can
practise in lessons and at home. It is very different from the structured essay
questions in the Core Content and Depth Studies. It takes the form of an
extended answer (an essay) in which you make a judgement about how
important or how significant a particular event, person, group, cause or
reason was in a historical development.
The one essay is worth 40 m arks.
Example questions
The questions will usually draw from some aspect of the Key Questions for
each of the Depth Studies. For example:
Germany, 1918–45  has the following Key Questions:
A  Was the Weimar Republic doom ed from the start?
B  Why was Hitler able to dom inate Germany by 1934?
C  How effectively did the Nazis control Germany, 1933–45?
D  What was it like to live in Nazi Germany?
An example of an extended answer question that draws from Key Question A
might be:
How important was the Treaty of Versailles as a reason for
instability in the early Weimar Republic? Explain your answer. [40]
Russia, 1905–41  has the following Key Questions:
A  Why did the tsarist regime collapse in 1917?
B  How did the Bolsheviks gain pow er, and how did they consolidate their
rule?
C  How did Stalin gain and hold on to pow er?
D  What was the impact of Stalin’s economic policies?
An example of an extended answer question that draws from Key Question B
might be:
How significant was the role of Lenin in the consolidation of
Bolshevik power? Explain your answer. [40]
USA, 1919–41  has the following Key Questions:
A  How far did the US economy boom  in the 1920s ?
B  How far did US society change in the 1920s ?
C  What were the causes and consequences of the Wall Street Crash?
D  How successful was the New Deal?
An example of an extended answer question that draws from Key Question D
might be:
How important were the alphabet agencies as a reason for the
success of the New Deal? Explain your answer. [40]
Your aim when writing an extended answer on significance or importance is
to assess (weigh up) how essential a particular event, person, group, cause
or reason was in a historical development.
Mark scheme
Extended answers have a generic mark scheme which can be used to mark
any question from any of the Depth Studies that you choose to answer. Your
teacher can help you understand this mark scheme. You can find the mark
scheme on the Cambridge Assessment International Education website in the
IGCSE History Syllabus along with Specimen Papers and mark schemes.
Key elements
Here are the most important elements in a strong answer.
An argument
Extended answers want you to make a judgement about how important or
how significant a particular factor, cause or reason (X) is. As we have seen
in the structured essay questions in the Core and Depth Studies, making a
judgement and supporting it with your own knowledge is a key historical
skill, especially when writing extended answers (essays).
You could practise in lessons or at home before you start writing or even
planning an extended answer, how important you think X is compared to
other factors, causes or reasons. One useful technique is to put the different
factors into priority order by rating them out of ten or you could use a
diagram to place the most important/significant factors at the top and the less
important/significant factors nearer the bottom.
Supported explanations
What events, details and examples can you think of that support the factor,
cause or reason (X)? As a History student, you need to be able to use
detailed and relevant contextual knowledge when assessing the relative
importance or significance of something – it is a very important skill for
historians when debating or giving their opinions so they can support their
arguments.
Balance
Extended answers should examine more than just the one factor (X) if they
are going to be developed into a strong response. What events, details and
examples can you think of that disagree with the factor, cause or reason (X)?
What other factors are also relevant to give a fuller answer?
A judgement
There are many different ways to make a judgement in an extended answer,
just like in the structured essay questions. Some teachers and students like to
use a conclusion to make their judgement about how important/significant
different factors were; others prefer to argue their case all the way through an
answer. You should try the different styles when you practise exam-style
questions or are preparing for assessments. Your teacher can help fine-tune
your style in lessons and with various different activities. Remember, a
strong, valid judgement will always be supported by accurate and relevant
knowledge.
Planning an extended answer
Below are two different approaches to planning an extended answer.
•  The first uses a table comparing the different factors. This should help you
assess relative importance/significance. This is particularly useful to help
you to analyse and compare the role of each factor.
•  The second uses a factor map. This approach is useful where you need to
show links between factors.
We are not suggesting you use anything as complex as this in an assessment or
when answering an exam-style question – there won’t be time. But it is
precisely because it is so hard to give time to planning in an actual exam that
it is so important to practise it before, without the time pressures, so that it
becomes almost instinctive.
Approach 1: Using a table
In the table like the one below:
•  make notes about the content in column 1, then
•  explain how that factor caused the thing in the question in column 2.
Column 2 is where you do the thinking and analysis. In your essay you won’t
just be listing the factors you will be evaluating their importance.
Factor description Factor importance
The factor in the
question: ……………….This was an important cause of
……………….  because…
Aspect 1  
Aspect 2  
Aspect 3  
Other factors  
Other factor 1  
Other factor 2  
Other factor 3  
On page 354 you can see how the table might look in planning an answer to
this question:
Factor description Factor importance
The factor in the
question: The Treaty ofThis was an important cause of
instability because…
Versailles
Military terms
German army limited to
100,000; no U-boats; only
six battleships; no tanks;
no air force; demilitarised
Rhineland…… it left Germany defenceless to
attack and the German army had
been a source of pride to many
Germans…
Territorial terms
Ten per cent of German
land taken; all overseas
colonies given to other
countries to run; 16 per
cent of coal and nearly 50
per cent of its iron
industry…… it meant Germany had been
stripped of its empire; it would also
weaken its economy; it would also
mean many Germans were living in
foreign countries, leading to
NATIONALISM…
War guilt clause and
reparations
Article 231 blamed
Germany for starting the
war; it would to pay for
damages mounting to £6.6
billion, set in 1921…… many Germans felt this was unfair
as other countries like France and
Russia were also to blame; led some
to want revenge; the reparations
weakened the already weak
economy…
Other factors This was an important cause of
instability because…
Weimar Constitution
Proportional
Representation used to
elect members of the
Reichstag; presidential
power – Article 48…… it meant no one party would ever
form a government; allowed extremist
parties to get seats in the Reichstag;
caused the Government to rely on the
President’s emergency decrees to
restore order…
Political uprisings
Spartacist uprising,
January 1919; Kapp
Putsch, 1920; Munich
Putsch, 1923 …… it showed the Weimar Republic
was weak and could not keep law and
order; Weimar used Freikorps to
crush Communists meaning the
Government was powerless without
an army…
Ruhr invasion and
hyperinflation
French and Belgian
invasion when Germany
failed to pay reparations
instalment; passive
resistance; printing
money; high prices…… it showed how defenceless
Germany was to attack; Weimar
Government caused money to
become worthless making trade
impossible; made economic
problems worse and people blamed
weak government…
How important was the Treaty of Versailles as a reason for
instability in the early Weimar Republic? Explain your answer. [40]
Approach 2: Using a factor map
In a diagram like the one below you:
•  write the factors and any details/facts about them in the boxes, then
•  explain the links between them on arrows between the boxes.
The arrow links are where you do y our thinking and analysis. These links
will help you decide on importance – if everything links back to a single
factor that suggests it is the most important factor. They will also give you an
angle to your paragraphs. Showing links between factors is one way of
improving your essays.
To keep your diagram neat you could number or letter the links and write
about them on a separate sheet (see below left).
Below right is how the factor map might look in planning an answer to this
question:
How important was the Treaty of Versailles as a reason for
instability in the early Weimar Republic? Explain your answer. [40]
Think before you write
Paper 4 contains two questions on each of the Depth Studies A–G. You
answer one only.
•  The questions all follow the same style.
•  They are all worth 40 m arks in total.
•  They all require an extended, essay-style answer.
1 Read questions carefully
•  When answering exam-style questions or using practice papers, make sure
you choose the correct Depth Study, of course – the one you have actually
studied!
•  Whenever you have a choice of questions make sure you have read all of
them before you decide which to answer. You should have revised enough
to mean you could do a ny of the questions but don’t simply opt for your
favourite topic.
•  Read the question to identify precisely the factor, the focus and the date
range. For example:
How significant was the role of Tsar Nicholas II as a cause of the March
Revolution in 1917 ? Explain your answer.
The role of Tsar Nicholas II is the factor.
The March Revolution is the focus.
Up to and including March 1917 is the date range.
2 Choose your question carefully
This is always important but when there is only one question it is even more
important! Choose the question where:
•  you know the content best and
•  where you already have a clear view on the argument.
3 Plan your answer
This is always an important aspect for developing your skills, especially if
you are writing an extended answer. Assessments and exam papers have time
limits, so make sure you don’t spend too long doing this. This may seem like
a waste of time or a luxury but you will be surprised how much it will help
you.
If you think through your answer first, then writing it is easy. If you skip the
thinking and just start writing the risks are:
•  Your writing will be muddled – it won’t be an argument it will just be a
collection of paragraphs.
•  You will write in an illogical order – and you never have time to rewrite
things in an exam.
•  Your points won’t lead to your conclusion – and the conclusion is almost
the most important thing in this essay.
•  Even more likely, you will keep thinking of something more to say and you
will run out of time to even write your conclusion.
4 Organise your thinking
We have given advice on how to plan an extended answer on page 352. That
was to allow you to practise before an assessment or the exams. In an actual
assessment or test, you will have to use something much more streamlined.
For example:
Support Challenge
  
Conclusion/Argument  
In column 1 put at least three facts and examples you can
think of to support the factor in the question.
In column 2 put at least three alternative factors with
examples. (Numerical balance is not everything but if you aim
for three in each column it ensures you start with some sort of
balance.)
Underline or circle any factor you think was particularly
important or significant. Write a short annotation saying why it
was more important than others.
Now write your conclusion (in note form or just the key
words). This ensures that when you start writing your essay
you know where you are heading. This will turn your essay
into an argument which is what the top levels of the mark
scheme are looking for.
5 Decide on a structure
There are many ways to structure an extended answer. Here is a common
structure taught by many teachers:
•  Start with a short introduction which states your argument.
•  Then explain reasons why you might agree with the factor in the question.
•  Then explain the importance/significance of other factors.
•  Finish by writing a conclusion to show the relative
importance/significance of the different factors by comparing them and
using some good e vidence to support your judgement.
The next three pages offer you worked examples from each topic. These are
not perfect answers. They could all be developed to produce even stronger
responses.
Worked example: Russia 1905–41
None of the answers on pages 355–357 are real student
answers. We have written them to help show the features of a
good answer.
How significant was Lenin to the collapse of the Provisional Government
by November 1917 ? Explain your answer.
Lenin is the factor.
November 1917 is the date range.
The collapse of the Provisional Government is the focus.
Lenin was leader of the Bolshevik Party and had spent time in
exile abroad during the rule of Tsar Nicholas II. In 1917, the Tsar
abdicated the throne during the March Revolution and his
Government was replaced by a Provisional Government which
shared power with the Petrograd Soviet.
The introduction here is mainly a background narrative
about Lenin and the March 1917 Revolution. It does not
address the question directly or provide any arguments
about significance. Remember, time management is an
important skill for all questions, so try not to waste time.
Lenin was very significant to the collapse of this new Provisional
Government by November 1917 when the Bolsheviks seized
power. When he returned to Russia in April 1917, he proclaimed a
new set of policies for the Bolshevik Party. These were known as
the April Theses. They included famous slogans such as ‘Peace,
bread, land’ and ‘All power to the Soviets’.
This paragraph is much more focused. It examines Lenin’s
April Theses but is mainly descriptive and could be
developed into a full explanation by giving reasons.
Lenin was significant because his April Theses directly opposed
and challenged the rule of the Provisional Government, something
that most of the other political parties didn’t do. The April Theses
also appealed to the peasants who were demanding land and to
the soldiers and workers who wanted to end the problems caused
by the First World War such as food and fuel shortages.
This explanation uses good supporting evidence to address
the significance of Lenin to the collapse of the Provisional
Government.
Also significant to the Provisional Government’s collapse was their
unpopular policies. Kerensky, the prime minister of the Provisional
Government, had launched a Summer Offensive against Germany
in support of the Allies, which was a massive failure and resulted
in large numbers of casualties. This caused an increase in
opposition to the Provisional Government from many peasants,
workers and soldiers and helped increase support for the
Bolshevik Party who were opposed to the war – its membership
grew to nearly 800,000 by November 1917. Many in Russia did
not want to continue the fighting in the First World War but many in
the Provisional Government and some in the Soviets wanted to
continue to help Russia’s allies.
The answer is showing good balance here by examining the
significance of another factor, in this case, the unpopular
policies of the Provisional Government. The explanation has
been well-developed with some strong supporting evidence
to add depth.
The role of Trotsky was significant as well. He had become the
Chairman of the Petrograd Soviet and had joined the Bolshevik
Party after being a more moderate Menshevik beforehand. He was
an excellent organiser and brilliant speaker and was very
significant in helping to plan the Bolshevik seizure of power in
November 1917.
Another factor has been examined here – the role of Trotsky.
It is well-focused and provides some limited explanation but
lacks the depth of knowledge shown in the paragraph above.
Overall, I think that Lenin was really significant to the collapse of
the Provisional Government but, as you can see, there were other
very significant factors as well such as the unpopular policies of
the Provisional Government and the actions of Trotsky.
The conclusion is a summary of the points above. It could be
improved with a clear judgement by comparing the relative
significance of the different factors.
Worked example: Germany 1919–45
How important was the Reichstag Fire in allowing Hitler to consolidate
power by 1934 ? Explain your answer.
Reichstag Fire is the factor.
By 1934 is the date range.
Allowing Hitler to consolidate power is the focus.
There were many events that helped Hitler become a dictator by
1934. The Reichstag Fire in February 1933 was one of the most
important but I think that the Enabling Act in March 1933, the
banning of trade unions and other political parties were also
important. The most important factor was the Night of the Long
Knives because it gave Hitler the support of the German army, the
Reichswehr, and removed an internal enemy for Hitler, the SA.
The introduction here is a great start. It shows a balanced
argument and states a judgement about which factor is the
most important and why.
Firstly, the Reichstag Fire of February 1933 was important for
Hitler as it allowed him to remove the Communist Party as an
enemy to Nazi rule. Hitler had promised the German industrialists
and middle classes that he would stop the threat of a communist
revolution like there had been in Russia in 1917 as it threatened
their property and wealth and as the Reichstag Fire was blamed
on a Dutch Communist, it played right into Hitler’s hands. Hitler
used the incident to demand emergency powers from President
Hindenburg which allowed him to use the German police and the
Nazi SA to arrest 4000 Communists. This helped Hitler increase
his hold over Germany by getting rid of one of the Nazi’s main
enemies, securing the support of German elites as well as close
down opposition newspapers, meetings and imprison suspects
and hold them without trial.
This paragraph is well-focused on the event addressed in
the question. It shows how the Reichstag Fire allowed Hitler
to increase his power by removing the Communists and
removing other opponents of the Nazis. There is some
strong factual knowledge to support the explanations
making this a well-developed point.
However, also important was the Enabling Act which became law
in March 1933. Hitler managed to get the support of the
Nationalists and the Centre Party in the Reichstag to pass the law.
This was made easier because the Communist Party had been
banned from the Reichstag and the SA and SS were used to
intimidate members of the Reichstag during the vote. The Enabling
Act gave Hitler the power to make laws without consulting the
Reichstag or the president, which made him a virtual dictator. He
was then able to use this new power to ban other political parties
in Germany and close down all of the trade unions, thus
increasing his power even more.
Here we can see balance provided to the argument by
examining other relevant events that increased Hitler’s
power. Once again, the explanations are supported by good
knowledge and understanding.
I think the most important event was the Night of the Long Knives
in June 1934. This was when Hitler used the SS, led by Himmler,
to eliminate members of the SA, including their leader Rohm.
Rohm was demanding a second revolution and wanted the SA to
become the new official German army, replacing the Reichswehr.
By arresting and murdering members of the SA, Hitler increased
his support from the President and the official army who then
agreed to take an oath of loyalty in August 1934. This eliminated
the last groups that threatened a Nazi dictatorship which is why it
was a more important factor than the others because up until this
point, Hitler could still be removed by the president, the SA or the
German army.
There is an attempt here to make a judgement by explaining
the most important factor – in this case, the Night of the
Long Knives. The argument and explanations are very
convincing and well-supported as it compares the relative
importance of this factor against the other factors from the
rest of the answer. However, this may have benefited from a
separate conclusion to fully develop this judgement.
Worked example: USA 1919–41
How important was mass production as a cause of the economic boom in
the 1920s ? Explain your answer.
Mass production is the factor.
The 1920s is the date range.
A cause of the economic boom is the focus.
There were many causes of the boom in the USA in the 1920s
such as mass production, advertising, Republican policies and the
USA’s natural resources. This led to wealth and prosperity for
many until 1929 when the Wall Street Crash brought it all to an
end, leading to the Depression.
The introduction here is a list of factors that led to the
economic boom. It is then followed by material that is not
really relevant – it would have benefited from a developed
argument about the most important factor.
Mass production is where companies used new inventions and
machines to produce consumer goods in large amounts. This was
helped by the fact that electricity was now used to power many
factories. Henry Ford used the principles of mass production in his
new assembly line system where each worker had a specific job to
do before it passed on to the next worker. The most famous car
produced was the Model T. By 1925, over 15 million of these cars
were produced using mass production. The production of the car
led to other industries growing such as steel, rubber and glass – in
fact, the car industry used 75 per cent of all the glass produced in
the USA.
The first paragraph is well-focused on mass production and
provides some well-selected examples and detailed
description. It does make a good link at the end of the
paragraph between the car industry and other related
industries like glass and rubber, but the explanation
provided is limited.
Advertising was also important to the boom. New goods like
fridges, radios and cars were advertised on billboards, in
magazines, newspapers and even at the cinema. Mail-order
companies were set up which helped people in the countryside to
access these new goods. Many people borrowed money or used
hire-purchase to buy these goods so they could pay for them in
instalments. This meant that companies were making huge profits
which pushed up share prices in many industries.
Here the answer provides some balance. Advertising is
examined as a cause and relevant examples of this are
stated convincingly. Some explanation of its importance is
given to help develop the answer.
Republican policies like laissez-faire helped the economy a lot.
Low taxes and tariffs were used to encourage Americans to buy
more from American companies.
This small paragraph briefly describes Republican policies –
it is clear that these policies are understood, but there is
only a very limited explanation of their importance as a
cause of the boom.
Also, the USA’s natural resources fuelled the boom. America had
lots of minerals such as iron, coal, gas and oil. American
companies didn’t have to import these things so they could grow
much quicker and more cheaply than other countries.
Similar to the previous paragraph, this explanation of the
USA’s natural resources is brief and under-developed. The
use of more examples would add greater detail.
In conclusion, I think that the most important cause of the
economic boom in the 1920s was mass production. It made new
products cheaper so more people could buy them. This gave
businesses higher profits so they could build new factories. It also
encouraged people to invest in these companies by buying shares
and when the share prices went up people were even richer – this
is known as confidence.
The conclusion attempts to make a judgement about the
most important cause. It is a crucial paragraph as it explains
the material used in the earlier paragraph on mass
production, which helps provide a much more balanced
explanation overall. It could be improved by comparing the
importance of mass production against the other factors.
Glossary
Abyssinian crisis International tensions resulting from invasion of
Abyssinia (present-day Ethiopia) by Italy in 1935.
Agent Orange Poisonous chemical used by US forces in Vietnam to
defoliate (remove leaves) from forest areas to deprive enemy of cover.
Alliance Arrangement between two countries to help or defend each other,
usually in trade or war.
Anschluss Joining of Austria and Germany as one state – forbidden by the
Treaty of Versailles 1919 bu t carried out by Hitler in 1938.
Anti-Comintern Pact Alliance between Germany, Italy and Japan in 1936
to combat spread of communism.
Anti-Semitism Prejudice against Jews.
Appeasement Policy of Britain and France in the 1930s  allowing Hitler to
break the terms of the Treaty of Versailles.
Arab nationalism Movement of Arab peoples in the Middle East to join
together to resist outside influence and to oppos e Israel in particular.
Armistice End to fighting.
Arms race Competition to build stockpiles of weapons
Article 10 Article of League of Nations Covenant which promised security
to League members from attack by other states.
Assembly Main forum of the League of Nations for discussing important
issues.
Atomic bomb/H bomb Nuclear weapons, only used in Second World War
by USA against Japan but a constant threat in the Cold War.
Autobahns High-speed motorways built by the Nazis in Germany in the
1930s  to create jobs.
Autocracy Rule by one individual with total pow er.
Ayatollah A senior Muslim cleric.
Baath Party Sunni Muslim political movement, most prominent in Iraq
from the 1960s . Strongly oppos ed to external interference in the Arab
world.
Bauhaus German design movement incorporating sleek lines and modern
materials.
Bay of Pigs Bay in Cuba, scene of disastrous attempt by Cuban exiles to
overthrow Fidel Castro. Caused humiliation for USA, which backed the
attack.
Beauty of Labour Nazi movement to improve conditions for industrial
workers and try to win their support.
Berlin airlift Operation in 1948–49 u sing aircraft to transport supplies to
West Berlin which had been cut off by USSR.
Berlin Blockade Action by USSR to cut road, rail and canal links between
West Berlin and the rest of Germany. Aim was to force USA and allies to
withdraw from West Berlin.
Berlin Wall Barrier constructed by communist East German Government to
block movement between East and West Berlin. As well as a wall there
were fences, dog s and armed guards.
Big Three 1) Three main leaders at Versailles Peace Conference 1919 –
Lloyd George (Britain), Wilson (USA), Clemenceau (France); 2) Leaders
at Yalta and Potsdam Conferences 1945 – R oosevelt/Truman (USA),
Churchill/Atlee (Britain), Stalin (USSR).
Blockade Tactic involving cutting off supplies to a city or country. Usually
by sea but can also be land or air blockade.
Bolshevik/Bolshevism Russian political movement led by Lenin and
following communist ideas developed by Karl Marx and further
developed by Lenin.
Boom Period of  high economic prosperity.
Boycott Refusing to have anything to do w ith a person or group.
Brezhnev Doctrine Policy of USSR from 1968 w hich effectively meant no
Eastern European states would be allowed to have a non-communist
government.
Budget The spending plans of a government. Can refer to a particular
policy or the whole government spending plan.
Capitalism/Capitalist Political, social and economic system centred on
democracy and individual freedoms such as free speech, political beliefs
and freedom to do bu siness.
Censorship System of controlling information to the public, usually
employed by governments. Can refer to paper, radio, TV or online
information.
CENTO Central Treaty Organisation – alliance of countries including
Britain, Turkey and Pakistan designed to resist the spread of communism.
Chancellor Head of the government.
Checkpoint Charlie Most famous point where travel between communist
East Berlin and US-controlled West Berlin was possible.
Chemical weapons Usually refers to weapons which employ poisonous
gas to kill enemies.
CIA The Central Intelligence Agency is a US government department, formed
in 1947, w hich gathers information (intelligence) about threats to the
USA but which also funds direct action (such as the Bay of Pigs
invasion) to support American foreign policy.
Civil war War between two sides within the same nation or group. Examples
in Russia 1919–21 a nd Spain 1936–37.
Co-existence Living side by side without threatening the other side. Most
famously put forward by Soviet leader Khrushchev when he propos ed
East and West could live in peaceful co-existence.
co-operation Working together – could be political, economic or legal.
Cold War Conflict that ran from c.1946 t o 1989 be tween the USA and the
USSR and their various allies. They never fought each other but used
propaganda, spying and similar methods against other. Also sponsored
other countries in regional wars.
Collective security Key principle of the League of Nations that all
members could expect to be secure because the other members of the
League would defend them from attack.
Collectivisation Policy to modernise agriculture in the USSR 1928–40.
Succeeded in modernising farming to some extent but with terrible human
cost.
Comecon Organisation to control economic planning in communist
countries of eastern Europe.
Cominform Organisation to spread communist ideas and also make sure
communist states followed ideas of communism practised in USSR.
Commissions Organisations set up by the League of Nations to tackle
economic, social and health problems.
Communism/Communist Political, economic and social system
involving state control of economy and less emphasis on individual rights
than capitalism.
Communist bloc Eastern European states controlled by communist
governments from the end of the Second World War to 1989.
Competition Pressure from rivals, usually in business and often rivals in
other countries.
Concentration camps Camps used by Nazis to hold pol itical oppon ents
in Germany.
Concordat A deal between the state and the Catholic Church.
Conference of Ambassadors Organisation involving Britain, France,
Italy and Japan which met to sort out international disputes. Worked
alongside League of Nations.
Conscription Compulsory service in the armed forces.
Consolidation Making a position more secure, usually when a political
party has just taken pow er.
Constitution A system of government.
Containment US policy in Cold War to stop the spread of communism.
Conventional weapons Non-nuclear weapons. Can refer to ground, air or
sea including missiles.
Cossacks Elite troops  of the Russian tsars.
Council Influential body  within the League of Nations which contained the
most pow erful members of the League.
Coup Revolution.
Covenant Agreement or set of rules.
Crash Collapse in value of US economy in 1929 w hich led to economic
depression in the 1930s .
Credit Borrowing money, usually from a bank.
Dawes Plan Financial aid package provided by the USA to Germany in
1924.
De-Stalinisation Policy of Soviet leader Khrushchev in the 1950s  to move
away from the policies of Stalin.
Demilitarised zone Area of land where troops  cannot be stationed, e.g.
Rhineland area of Germany after the First World War.
Democracy Political system in which the popu lation votes for its
government in elections held on a regular basis.
Democrat Member of one of the main US political parties.
Depression Period of  economic hardship in which trade is poor  and
usually leading to problems such as unemployment and pos sibly political
unrest.
Dictator Leader of a state who has total control and doe s not have to listen
to oppon ents or face elections.
Dictatorship System in which one person runs a country.
Diktat Term used in Germany to describe the Treaty of Versailles because
Germany had no say in the terms of the Treaty.
Diplomatic relations How countries discuss issues with each other.
Breaking off diplomatic relations can sometimes be a first step towards
war.
Disarmament Process of scrapping land, sea or air weapons.
Domino theory Policy in which the USA believed it had to stop countries
becoming communist otherwise they would fall to communism like
dominoes.
Draft US term for compulsory military service.
Duma Russian Parliament established after 1905 r evolution in Russia and a
source of oppos ition to the tsar 1905–17.
Ebert President of Germany 1919–25. He was the first democratically
elected president.
Economic depression Period of  economic dow nturn where trade
between countries and inside countries declines, often leading to
unemployment.
Edelweiss Pirates Youth groups in Germany who oppos ed the Nazis,
especially in the war years.
Enabling Act Law passed in 1933 w hich gave the government pow ers to
arrest oppon ents.
Final Solution Nazi plan to exterminate the Jews and other races in
Europe. Generally thought to have begun in 1942.
Five-Year Plan Programme of economic development in the USSR from
1928 on wards. Achieved considerable progress in industry but with
heavy human cost.
Flappers Young women in the 1920s , especially in the USA, who had
greater freedom than previously because of job oppor tunities and
changing attitudes.
Freedom of speech Ability to publish or speak any religious or political
view without being arrested.
Freikorps Ex-soldiers in Germany after the First World War.
Führer Leader (German).
Gangster A criminal.
General strike Large-scale co-ordinated strike by workers designed to
stop essential services like pow er, transport etc.
Gestapo Secret police in Nazi Germany.
Glasnost Openness and transparency – pol icy of Soviet leader Mikhail
Gorbachev in the 1980s  designed to allow people to have their views
heard and criticise the government.
Gleichschaltung Process of making sure that all organisations were
controlled by Nazis.
Guerrilla warfare Type of warfare which avoids large-scale battles and
relies on hit-and-run raids.
Gulag Prison camp in remote area where prisoners were put to work.
Hindsight Looking back on historical events with the ability to see what
happened since.
Hire purchase System of paying for goods  in instalments so they could be
enjoyed straight away.
Hitler Youth Youth organisation in Nazi Germany designed to prepare
young people for war and make them loyal Nazis.
Ho Chi Minh Trail Route in Cambodia used by North Vietnamese and Viet
Cong forces to supply forces fighting South Vietnamese and US forces.
Hollywood Suburb of Los Angeles, home of the US film industry.
Holocaust The mass murder of Jews and other racial groups by the Nazis in
the Second World War.
Hooverville Shanty town made up of temporary shacks, common in the
economic depression of the 1930s  in the USA and named after President
Hoove r.
Hundred Days The initial period of  President F.D. Roosevelt in 1933 i n
which he passed a huge range of measures to help bring economic
recovery.
Hyperinflation Process of money becoming worthless, most notable
instance was in Germany in 1923.
ICBM Inter Continental Ballistic Missile – nuclear missiles capable of
travelling through space and almost impossible to stop.
idealist Person motivated by particular beliefs, e.g. commitment to right of
peoples to rule themselves.
Immigration Entry into a country with the purpose of settling.
Indochina Former name for Vietnam.
Industrialisation Building up factories, coal, electricity etc.
Inflation Rising prices.
Intelligence (as in CIA) Secret services of states, e.g. CIA in USA or KGB
in USSR.
Iron curtain Term used by Churchill in 1946 t o describe separation of
eastern and western Europe into communist and non-communist blocs.
Isolationism Policy in the USA in the 1920s  which argued that the USA
should not get involved in international disputes.
Jazz Type of music which became extremely popu lar from the 1920s ,
generally associated with African American musicians.
Kaiser Ruler of Germany.
Kapp Putsch Attempt to ove rthrow democratically elected government in
Germany in 1920.
Kerensky Leader of the Provisional Government which governed Russia
after first revolution in 1917.
Kolkhoz Large farms created by merging smaller farms under policy of
collectivisation.
Kristallnacht Night of Broken Glass – attack on Jewish properties across
Germany in November 1938.
Ku Klux Klan Secret Society in USA which aimed to keep white supremacy
in USA and terrorised African Americans and other groups.
Kulak Prosperous peasant farmer.
Laissez-faire Philosophy based on the idea that governments should not get
involved in economy, business or people’s lives.
Landlord/peasant Key figures in farming, particularly in Russia c.1900.
Landlords owned land but also maintained Tsar’s authority. Peasants
worked for the landlords.
League of German Maidens Organisation in Nazi Germany for girls
designed to get girls to embrace Nazi beliefs and values.
League of Nations Organisation set up to manage international disputes
and prevent wars after the First World War. Brainchild of US President
Woodrow Wilson.
Lebensraum Living Space – be came part of Hitler’s plans to conquer an
empire for Germany in the 1930s .
Left-wing Groups or individuals whose political beliefs are rooted in
socialism or communism.
Lenin Leader of the Bolshevik/Communist Party in Russia and a key figure
in bringing them to pow er in 1917 a nd keeping pow er until his death in
1924.
Lynch Murder, usually by a mob and carried out on African Americans.
MAD Mutually Assured Destruction – the idea that no state would ever use
nuclear weapons because they would themselves be destroyed by
retaliation.
Mail order Popular type of shopping in the USA in the 1920s  in which
customers ordered from catalogues.
Manchurian crisis International crisis sparked off when Japan invaded the
Chinese province of Manchuria in 1931. Despite investigating, the
League of Nations failed to stop Japanese aggression.
Mandates System by which Britain and France took control of territories
ruled by Germany and Turkey which had been on the losing side in the
First World War.
Marshall Aid Programme of US economic aid to western Europe 1947–51.
Aim was to aid economic recovery but also to prevent more states
becoming communist.
Marshall Plan The plan behind Marshall Aid. Although it was an economic
programme it was also pol itical. Some commentators argued it was an
economic form of imperialism designed to allow the USA to dom inate
western Europe.
Martial law Rule by the military rather than a civil police force.
Martyr Person who dies for a cause they believe in.
Marxist Person who follows the ideas of Karl Marx, a political
commentator who believed that societies would eventually become
communist as workers overthrew bosses and took control of wealth and
power.
Mass consumption Buying of goods  by large proportion of the
popu lation.
Mass production System of producing goods  in factories using production
lines in which workers specialised in one task. Made production quick,
efficient and relatively cheap.
Mein Kampf ‘My Struggle’: the autobiography of Adolf Hitler in which he
set out his theories about pow er and racial superiority.
Mensheviks Oppos ition party in Russia in early 1900s , part of the Social
Democratic Party before it split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks.
Military force Use of armed force (e.g. troops , bom bing by aircraft) as
oppos ed to pol itical or economic methods.
Missile gap Term to describe the alleged advantage of the USSR over the
USA in nuclear missiles. Historians doubt whether the missile gap was
as real as was claimed.
Mobilised Armed forces told to prepare for war.
Monkey Trial Trial of teacher John Scopes for teaching about evolution in
Tennessee in 1925.
Moral condemnation Criticism of a state for actions against another state
– prelude to stronger action such as economic sanctions or military force.
Mullah A man or woman well educated in the Islamic religion, often a term
used to describe Islamic clergy.
Multi-national force Force made up of more than one state. Often a
political devise to make it appear that a policy is not driven by one state,
e.g. UN intervention in the Korean War in 1950 or  the Gulf Wars of the
1990s .
Munich Agreement Agreement in October 1938 i n which Britain and
France agreed to Hitler’s demands to control the Sudetenland area of
Czechoslovakia. This is generally seen as the final stage of the policy of
Appeasement.
Munich Putsch Attempted revolt by Hitler and Nazis in 1923, a iming to
overthrow the government.
NAACP National Association for the Advancement of Colored People –
organisation whose aim was to promote and support the cause of African
Americans in the USA in the 1920s  and 1930s .
Napalm Highly explosive chemical weapon which spread a fireball over a
large area. Used extensively in the Vietnam War.
National Community Key idea of Nazis in Germany in the 1930s  – they
wanted people to become part of and promote a ‘National Community’.
Nationalism Strong sense of pride in your own country, sometimes directed
aggressively towards other countries or minority groups.
Nationalities Racial groups within larger states, e.g. Poles in the Russian
Empire or Hungarians in the Austrian Empire.
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organisation: Alliance formed by USA and
other Western states which promised to defend members against any
attack, particularly from the USSR.
Nazism National Socialism, the political belief of Adolf Hitler and the Nazi
Party based on aggressive expansion of German lands and the superiority
of the Aryan race.
Nazi–Soviet Pact Agreement in 1939 be tween Hitler and Stalin to not
attack each other and to divide Poland between them.
Negative cohesion Term coined by historian Gordon Craig to describe
the way different groups in Germany supported the Nazis because they
feared the oppon ents of the Nazis (particularly the Communists).
New Deal Policies introduced by US President Roosevelt from 1933
onwards to try to tackle US economic problems.
New Economic Policy Policy introduced by Lenin in the USSR after the
Russian Civil War. Basically allowed limited amounts of private
enterprise, which went against communist theory but was an emergency
measure to help the economy recover from war.
Night of the Long Knives Attack on Ernst Rohm and other leading
figures in the SA in June 1934.
NKVD Secret police in USSR, later becoming the KGB.
Nobel Peace Prize Prize awarded to pol iticians who have made major
contribution to bringing an end to a conflict.
Normalcy Term used by US President Warren Harding in the 1920s  to
describe the return to normal life after the First World War.
November Criminals The German politicians who signed the Treaty of
Versailles. This was a term of abuse exploited by extreme parties in
Germany, especially the Nazis, to undermine democracy.
Nuclear deterrent Term which referred to the nuclear weapons owned by
each side in the Cold War. The fact that each side had these weapons
stoppe d the other side from using theirs.
Nuremberg Laws Series of laws passed in Germany in 1935
discriminating against Jews and other racial groups in Germany.
Nuremberg rally Huge political meeting held every June from 1923 t o
1938.
Okhrana Secret police force of the Russian Tsars.
One-party state State where only one political party is permitted by law
such as Nazi Germany or the USSR under communism.
Operation Rolling Thunder Huge-scale bom bing campaign by USA
against North Vietnam during the Vietnam War.
Over-production Usually in agriculture – growing too m uch food s o that
demand is filled and prices fall.
Paris Peace Conference Conference which ran 1919–23 t o decide how
to officially end the First World War. Resulted in Treaty of Versailles
with Germany and three other treaties.
Peasants Poor farmers who worked their own small plots of land and
usually had to work the lands of landlords as well.
People power Term to describe the rise of popu lar action against
communist regimes in 1989 w hich contributed to the fall of communism.
Perestroika Restructuring – the idea of Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev
in the later 1980s  that the USSR needed to reform.
Polish Corridor Strip of land which under the Treaty of Versailles 1919
gave Poland access to the sea but separated East Prussia from the rest of
Germany.
Politburo Main decision-making group of the Communist Party in the
USSR, similar to British Cabinet.
Potsdam Conference Conference held in August 1945 be tween President
Truman (USA), Stalin (USSR) and Churchill, then Atlee (Britain).
Discussed major issues including the atomic bom b and Soviet take-over
of eastern Europe.
Prague Spring Reform movement in Czechoslovakia to change communist
rule in Czechoslovakia, eventually crushed by Soviet forces.
Production line System of producing cars in which each worker had only
one job.
Prohibition Amendment to US Constitution passed in 1919 t o ban
production of alcohol.
Propaganda Method of  winning over a popu lation to a particular idea or
set of beliefs. Also used in wartime to raise morale.
Provisional Government Government headed by Alexander Kerensky
which took control of Russia after the March 1917 r evolution which
overthrew the Tsar.
Public opinion View of majority or large section of popu lation on an issue,
most important in democracies where politicians often have to win over
public opinion.
Purges Policy pursued by Stalin in the USSR in the 1930s  to remove
potential oppon ents. Involved arrests, torture, show trials, deportations to
labour camps and executions.
Putsch Revolt designed to ove rthrow the existing government, most
commonly associated with the Kapp Putsch in 1920 a nd the Nazis’
attempted Munich Putsch in 1923.
Radical Term used to describe extreme political views.
Realist Politician who accepts a particular course of action even though it is
not what they would prefer to do.
Rearmament Building up arms and armed forces, used as a means to fight
unemployment by many states in the 1930s , including Nazi Germany and
Britain.
Red Army Armed forces of the Communists in the Russian Civil War 1918–
21 and then the official forces of the Soviet Union.
Red Scare Wave of fear about communist infiltration of American political
and social life to undermine it. Seen in the 1920s  and also the 1940s  and
1950s .
Reichstag German parliament.
Remilitarisation Reintroduction of armed forces into the Rhineland area of
Germany in 1936 e ven though this was banned by the Treaty of
Versailles.
Reparations Compensation to be paid by Germany to France, Belgium,
Britain and other states as a result of the First World War.
Repeal The overturning of a law.
Republic System of government which does not have a monarch.
Republican One of the two main political parties in the USA.
Reservation Area of land set aside for Native Americans.
Reunification The bringing back together of Germany in 1990 a fter the
division of 1945.
Rhineland Area of Germany that bordered France. Under Treaty of
Versailles it was demilitarised – n o German forces were allowed there.
Right-wing Political groups or individuals with beliefs usually in national
pride, authoritarian government and oppos ed to communism.
Roaring Twenties Refers to the 1920s  in the USA, a period of  major
social and economic change for many Americans.
Ruhr Main industrial area of Germany.
SA The Brownshirts – Stormtroope rs of the Nazi Party.
Saar Region on the border between France and Germany. Run by League of
Nations from 1920 t o 1935 w hen its people voted to become part of
Germany.
Sanctions Actions taken against states which break international law, most
commonly economic sanctions, e.g. refusing to supply oil.
Satellite state State that is controlled by a larger state, e.g. eastern
European states controlled by USSR after the Second World War.
Search and destroy Type of tactic used by US military in Vietnam to
locate Viet Cong fighters and kill them.
SEATO South East Asia Treaty Organisation – alliance formed in 1954
designed mainly to block the spread of communism.
Second New Deal Set of policies introduced by US President Roosevelt in
1935–36.
Secret police Police force specialising in dealing with threats to the state,
e.g. political oppon ents rather than normal crimes.
Secretariat The section of the League of Nations which carried out
administrative tasks and also the agencies of the League.
Shares System which allows large or small investors to ow n part of a
company and get a share of its profits.
Shia (Shiite) One of the main branches of the Muslim faith.
Show trials Trials of political oppon ents which were given great publicity
– most prominent in the USSR under Stalin in the 1930s .
Social Democratic Party Main left-wing (and generally most popu lar)
political party in Germany in the 1920s  and 1930s . Eventually banned by
the Nazis when they came to pow er in 1933.
Socialism Political system in which government takes strong control of
economic and social life. In theory socialist societies would eventually
become communist societies.
Socialist Revolutionaries Oppos ition group in tsarist Russia, the most
well-supported as they had the support of the peasants.
Solidarity Polish trade union which emerged in the 1980s  and oppos ed the
communist government there.
Soviet republics The various smaller states which made up the USSR.
Soviet sphere of influence Terms agreed at Yalta Conference in 1945 –
Western pow ers agreed that Poland and other parts of eastern Europe
would be under Soviet influence.
Soviet Union The former Russian empire after it became a communist state
in the 1920s .
Soviets Councils of workers.
Spanish Civil War Conflict in Spain which was seen as a rehearsal for the
Second World War when German and Italian forces intervened to support
General Franco.
Spartacists Communists in Germany in 1919 w ho wanted a revolution in
Germany similar to the 1917 r evolution in Russia.
Speculation Buying shares in the hope that their price will rise when they
can be sold at a profit.
SS Organisation within the Nazi Party which began as Hitler’s body guard
but expanded to become a state within a state.
Stakhanovite A very hard and committed Soviet worker.
Stalin Leader of the USSR from 1929 t o his death in 1953.
Stock market Trading arena where investors can buy and sell shares in
companies.
Stolypin Minister of the Tsar in imperial Russia.
Strength Through Joy Leisure programme run by the Nazis in Germany
to improve the lives of ordinary people.
Sudetenland Area of Czechoslovakia which bordered Germany and
contained many German speakers. Taken over by Hitler in 1938 a s part
of the Munich Agreement.
Summit meeting Meeting of leaders to discuss key issues, e.g. US
President Reagan and Soviet leader Gorbachev’s meetings in the 1980s .
Sunni One of the main branches of the Muslim faith.
Superpower A country in a dom inant international position that is able to
influence events.
Supreme Court Highest court in the USA, whose job w as to rule if laws
passed by the government were challenged as being unconstitutional.
Surveillance Watching, usually by intelligence agencies or secret police.
Tariffs Taxes on imported goods  which made them more expensive – often
designed to protect makers of home-produced goods .
Temperance Movement that oppos ed alcohol.
Tennessee Valley Authority Organisation set up by President Roosevelt
to help provide economic development in the Tennessee Valley. Most
famous projects were giant hydroelectric dams.
Tet Offensive Attack launched by Viet Cong and North Vietnamese forces
in 1968. Seen by many as the turning point in the Vietnam War as US
public turned against the war.
Totalitarian Complete control.
Trade sanctions Restricting sale of goods  to a nation or sales from a
nation.
Trade union Organisation that represents workers.
Traditional industries Well-established industries such as textiles, coal,
agriculture.
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk Treaty between Germany and Russia in 1918
which ended war between the two. Germany took massive amounts of
land and reparations.
Treaty of Versailles Treaty that officially ended war between Allies and
Germany in 1919. Controversial because of the terms, which Germany
claimed to be excessively harsh.
Trotsky Leading figure in the Bolshevik Party, especially in the Russian
Civil War 1918–21.
Truman Doctrine Policy of US President Truman from 1947 t o promise
help to any state threatened by communism.
Trusts Groups of businesses working together illegally to reduce
competition.
Tsar Ruler of Russia up until revolution in 1917.
Tsarina Wife of tsar.
Unanimous Agreed by all.
United Nations Organisation that succeeded the League of Nations in 1945
and whose aim was to solve international disputes and promote
humanitarian causes.
US sphere of influence Areas seen as under the control or political or
economic influence of the USA.
USSR The former Russian empire after it became a communist state in the
1920s .
Viet Cong/Viet Minh Underground army fighting against French rule in the
1950s  and then government of South Vietnam and its US allies in Vietnam
War.
Vietnamisation Policy of handing over Vietnam War to South Vietnam
forces.
Volk People (German).
Wall Street Crash Collapse in value of US companies in October 1929
which led to widespread economic collapse.
War Communism Policy pursued by communist leader Lenin 1918–21 t o
try to build communist society in Russia and also fight against his
oppon ents. Caused major hardships and had to be temporarily replaced
with New Economic Policy.
War guilt Clause in Treaty of Versailles which forced Germany to accept
blame for the First World War.
Warsaw Pact Alliance of USSR and eastern European states to defend
against attack and preserve communist control in eastern Europe.
Weimar Small town in Germany, home of the German government in the
1920s .
West/Western Powers Term generally used to refer to USA and its allies
in the Cold War.
WMD (Weapons of Mass Destruction) Missiles, bom bs or shells which were
armed with chemical, biological or nuclear weapons.
Yalta Conference Conference between USA, USSR and Britain in 1945 t o
decide the shape of the world after the Second World War ended.
Young Plan American economic plan in 1929 t o reorganise reparations
payments to make it easier for Germany to pay.
Zemstva Local councils in tsarist Russia.